         Hunter
    Education Program




Hunter Education Instructor Manual
     Bowhunter Education Instructors
      Hunter Education Instructors

                  Basic
                 Master
               Area Chiefs
                Assistants




                    1
                     Texas Hunter Education
                        Instructor Manual
                                       REVISED MAY 2019




                                 A Federal Assistance Project
                                           W-104-S
                            United States Fish and Wildlife Service




                                              NOTICE
TPWD receives federal assistance from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and other federal agencies
and is subject to Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of
1973, Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, the Age Discrimination Act of 1975,
Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, and state anti-discrimination laws which prohibit
discrimination the basis of race, color, national origin, age, sex or disability. If you believe that you
have been discriminated against in any TPWD program, activity or facility, or need more
information, please contact Office of Diversity and Inclusive Workforce Management, U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service, 5275 Leesburg Pike, Falls Church VA 22041.

                                   PWD BK K0700-049A (03/18)

                                                    2
          TEXAS PARKS AND WILDLIFE DEPARTMENT
          HUNTER EDUCATION INSTRUCTOR MANUAL

CHAPTER I. PROGRAM, POLICIES AND PROCEDURES

A.      PROGRAM
     1. HUNTER EDUCATION IN TEXAS
         a. Purpose
         b. History
         c. Funding
         d. TPWD and Supporting Agencies & Organizations

B.     POLICIES
     1. FEDERAL/STATE
     2. TPWD
        Fees
        Donations
        Performance
        Records
     3. TEXAS HUNTER EDUCATION PROGRAM
        Basic Hunter Education
        *NEW* Hunting 101s Seminars, Workshops & Mentored Hunts
        Bowhunter Education
        Outreach and Special Events
        Area Chiefs
     4. HUNTER EDUCATION INSTRUCTORS
        Area Chiefs
        Volunteers
        Teachers (Professional Educators)
        Game Wardens/TPWD Employees
     5. INSTRUCTORS SHOULD
     6. INSTRUCTORS POLICIES
        Job Description
        Performance Standards and Review
        Environmental/Conservation Awareness
        Sexual Harassment – Criminal Penalty
        Drug- Alcohol – Tobacco Free Work Place
        Dress and Appearance
        Conflict of Interest
        Hunting 101s and Mentor/Youth Hunt Programs
        Use of State Property/Facilities
        Insubordination.
        Work Rules
        Standards of Trust
        Courtesy
        Competence
        Care
                                             3
          Notification
          Corrective Action
     7. RISK MANAGEMENT, LIABILITY AND INSURANCE
          Risk Management
          Liability
     8. HUNTER EDUCATION FIREARM POLICY
     9. VOLUNTEER INSURANCE
     10. PROGRAM PROVISIONS
        a. Instructor & Student Supplies and Materials
        b. Communications
        c. Record Keeping
        d. Publicity and Promotions
        e. Recognition
        f. Special Events
        g. Instructor Courses
        h. In-Service Training
        i. Instructor Levels
        j. Tenure Pins
        k. Hunting Accident/Incident Data
        l. Instructor Discounts
        m. INCENTIVE AWARD Program

C.      PROCEDURES
     1. BECOMING AN INSTRUCTOR
     2. ORDERING SUPPLIES
     3. PREPARING FOR A COURSE
         a. Choosing a Class Site
         b. Supplies and Materials
         c. Classroom Courses
         d. Field Courses
         e. Live Fire Exercises
         f. Publicity
         g. Registration
         h. Training Aids, Dummy Firearms/Ammo & Videos
         i. Exam
         j. Attendance/Grades
         k. “Prep” Hours
         l. “Taught” Hours
         m. Course Payments

     4. COURSE CHECKLIST




                                         4
      TEXAS PARKS AND WILDLIFE DEPARTMENT
      HUNTER EDUCATION INSTRUCTOR MANUAL

A. PROGRAM
  HUNTER EDUCATION IN TEXAS
    a. Purpose

    The purpose of hunter education is to produce safe, responsible, knowledgeable and
    involved hunters and shooters.

        The goals of hunter education are to:
        • Promote firearm, sporting arm and hunting safety
        • Promote hunting ethics and compliance to hunting regulations
        • Combat poaching
        • Promote wise use of sustainable resources and the outdoor landscape
        • Enhance hunting traditions and values

        The benefits of hunter education are:
        • Reduction of hunting accidents
        • Reduction of hunting violations
        • Enhancement of outdoor behaviors
        • Continuation of the hunting heritage

        Your job/role as a hunter education instructor is to:
        • Teach firearm safety, particularly to young people
        • Teach basic hunter education, particularly to those mandated by law
        • Teach advanced hunter education workshops, particularly to families
        • Teach outdoors/wilderness skills, particularly to non-hunters
        • Teach new instructors and monitor local efforts
        • Communicate to the media the positive aspects of hunting and the shooting sports
        • Be professional – an ambassador for hunting/shooting sports

    b. History

    Texas Parks and Wildlife Department (TPWD) started a voluntary hunter education
    program in 1972, mainly to provide training for Texas hunters traveling to other states
    requiring hunter education. The most notable of these was Colorado, which passed a
    mandatory requirement in 1970 that affected hunters born on or after January 1, 1949.

    NRA’s existing hunter safety program was used and was four (4) hours in length. Many
    NRA instructors in Texas were recruited as the first Texas hunter education instructors.
    By 1987, over 150,000 students completed the voluntary course, and the required
    minimum for a course was ten (10) hours over two (2) days – a requirement recommended


                                            5
by the federal government which monitored funds (excise taxes) returned to states for
hunter education and target range development.

In June 1987, The Texas legislature passed S.B. 504, the mandatory hunter education law
for the State of Texas. The law allowed the TPW Commission to adopt regulations
requiring hunter education for Texas hunters under 17 years of age at the time. The
effective date chosen by the TPW Commission was June 1, 1988. Therefore, anyone born
on or after September 2, 1971 (“Grandfather Date” for Texas) would have to complete
the training to legally hunt in Texas.

Hunter Education (As it appears in the current TPWD Outdoor Annual)

Mandatory Hunter Education
Every hunter (including out-of-state hunters) born on or after Sept. 2, 1971, must successfully
complete a Hunter Education Course. Proof of certification or deferral is required to be on your
person while hunting. Minimum age of certification is 9 years. In-person course cost is $15.
Persons 17 years of age and older have the option of taking the course in person or online. Online
course    costs    vary    by    internet    provider.    Call    (800)    792-1112     or    visit
www.tpwd.texas.gov/education/hunter-education for information about course options.

If you were born on or after Sept. 2, 1971, and you are:
 under age 9, you must be “accompanied”
 age 9 - 16, you must successfully complete a hunter education in-person course or be
     accompanied
 age 17 and over, you must successfully complete an in-person or approved online only hunter
     education course; or purchase a “Hunter Education Deferral” and be “accompanied”

“Accompanied” refers to a resident or non-resident who is at least 17 years of age, is licensed to
hunt in Texas, and has passed hunter education or is exempt (born before Sept. 2, 1971), and is
within normal voice control.

Hunter Education Deferral (Item 166): $10
Allows a person, age 17 or older, who has not completed hunter education to defer completion for
up to one year. A deferral may only be obtained once and is only valid until the end of the current
license year. A person who has been convicted or has received deferred adjudication for violation of
the mandatory hunter education requirement is prohibited from applying for a deferral.

Note: Certification is not required to purchase a hunting license.
Bowhunter Education: Certification is required on the Hagerman National Wildlife Refuge,
Pottsboro.
Note: Bowhunter education does not substitute for Hunter Education certification.
Military/Law Enforcement Hunter Education Exemptions
Except as required by federal or local jurisdictions and/or private landowners, the following
persons are exempt from requirements to complete a hunter education course to hunt in Texas:
 Active duty members and honorably discharged veterans of the United States armed forces;
 Active duty members or those who have previously served as members of the Texas Army
    National Guard, Texas Air National Guard, or the Texas State Guard; or
                                           6
            Persons who are serving or have previously served as peace officers as described by
             Subdivision (1), (2), (3), or (4), Article 2.12, Code of Criminal Procedure.

APPENDIX A – TEXAS HUNTER EDUCATION STATUTE (Sec. 62.014 Parks & Wild. Code)

APPENDIX B – MANDATORY HUNTER EDUCATION RULES (Texas Administrative Code)

        c. Funding

         Hunter education in the United States is funded primarily by federal dollars, entitled
          “hunter safety apportionment,” available to states from “Federal Aid in Wildlife
          Restoration” excise taxes paid for by purchasers of firearms and ammunition. These
          federal dollars supplement state funds available through student fees, hunting license
          fees and/or similar revenues.
         Pittman–Robertson Act (1937) – called “Federal Aid in Wildlife Restoration”, the act
          provides funding to states for wildlife habitat restoration, land acquisition, research and
          administration; funds derived from an 11 percent excise tax on sporting arms and
          ammunition. For more information, go to the following web site:
          http://www.fws.gov/midwest/wsfr/index.htm
         Dingell-Hart Amendment/Bills (1970 & 1972) – amended 1937 Pittman-Robertson
          Act by adding excise taxes on handguns and archery equipment and earmarking the
          added taxes specifically for the development of hunter education and target ranges.
         Game, Fish and Water Safety Fund (“Fund 9”) – State Funding - partially offset by
          student fees collected by the instructors and sent to the agency

        d. TPWD and Supporting Agencies & Organizations

TEXAS PARKS AND WILDLIFE DEPARTMENT (TPWD) - State agency responsible for
administering the mandatory hunter education program in Texas; created with the merging of the
State Parks Board with the Game and Fish Commission in 1963; mission is “To manage and con-
serve the natural and cultural resources of Texas and to provide hunting, fishing and outdoor
recreation opportunities for the use and enjoyment of present and future generations.” HE fulfills
the mission on behalf of hunters (and purchasers of handguns and archery equipment).
           •    Nine-member Commission – Appointed by the governor; (non-paid position)
                hold office for six-year terms; authority for implementing fish and wildlife
                regulations; oversee the operations of TPW.
           •    Executive Director – Appointed by the TPWD Commission; (paid position)
                responsible for the administration, operation and planning functions of the
                department.

                Divisions: The agency currently has 13 internal divisions:

                    •       Executive
                    •       Coastal Fisheries
                    •       Communications
                    •       Financial Resources
                    •       Human Resources
                    •       Information Technology
                                                 7
                    •      Infrastructure
                    •      Inland Fisheries
                    •      Law Enforcement
                    •      Legal
                    •      State Parks
                    •      Support Services
                    •      Wildlife

U.S. FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE (USFWS) – Federal agency responsible for
administering federal aid funds used by most states to help fund HE efforts.
                    • Region 1 – Pacific- Oregon, Washington, Idaho, Hawaii and other Pacific
                            Islands
                    • Region 2 – Southwest- Arizona, New Mexico, Oklahoma and Texas
                    • Region 3 – Midwest - Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri,
                            Ohio and Wisconsin
                    • Region 4 – Southeast - Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky,
                            Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina and Tennessee
                    • Region 5 – Northeast - Connecticut, Delaware, Maine, Maryland,
                            Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania,
                            Rhode island, Vermont, Virginia and West Virginia
                    • Region 6 – Mountain-Prairie - Colorado, Kansas, Montana, Nebraska, North
                            Dakota, South Dakota, Utah and Wyoming
                    • Region 7 – Alaska
                    • Region 8- Pacific Southwest – California, Nevada, and Klamath Basin

INTERNATIONAL HUNTER EDUCATION ASSOCIATION (IHEA) - USA

The International Hunter Education Association (IHEA) - USA is the professional hunter education
association affiliated with the Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies and the 50 state fish and
hunter education programs. The programs employ 55,000 instructors, many of whom are volunteers
that teach hunting and shooting safety and responsibilities throughout the United States. IHEA-
USA establishes the STANDARDS (See Chapter II) and reciprocity between states, provinces and
countries. IHEA-USA also serves to support state Hunter Education administrators.

TEXAS HUNTER EDUCATION INSTRUCTOR ASSOCIATION (THEIA): Established
as a non-profit corporation with tax exempt status under §501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code,
organization assists in the professional development of Hunter Education Instructors, program
enhancement and special events including the “Texas Youth Hunter Education Challenge,” an
opportunity for youth to compete and measure their hunter education knowledge and skills against
others in Texas and in the nation (National Youth Hunter Education Challenge), and the annual
Instructor Awards Banquet.

TEXAS 4-H NATURAL RESOURCES & SHOOTING SPORTS - Encourages young people,
their parents and adult volunteers to participate in natural resources and related natural science
programs through their interest in shooting, hunting and related activities. For more information,
contact the Texas A & M AgriLife Extension Service in your community.



                                                8
TEXAS STATE RIFLE ASSOCIATION (TSRA) & TSRA FOUNDATION: State affiliate of
NRA; it is the primary sponsor of statewide competitive shooting in rifle and handgun in all
categories (rim fire, center fire and black powder). TSRA Foundation funds mobile shooting sports,
Student Air Riflery Program ® and related shooting sports efforts and programs.

TEXAS WILDLIFE ASSOCIATION (TWA): A tax-exempt §501(c)(3) organization, TWA was
established as the state advocacy group for wildlife management, landowners and wildlife
conservation. TWA currently sponsors the “Texas Youth Hunting Program,” the pinnacle of HE
for students through age 16; and programs like the Brigades – advanced hunter education camps.

TEXAS GAME WARDEN ASSOCIATION (TGWA): Founded in 1979 to advance the
concept of “Conservation for Future Generations.” TGWA supports hunts, fishing trips and hunter
education camps for Texas youth with volunteer support by Associate members of TGWA.

ASSOCIATION OF FISH AND WILDLIFE AGENCIES (AFWA) – Professional
organization of state agency directors and other fish and wildlife professionals that provides support
and information to all state fish and wildlife agencies; oversees direction of hunter education with
the establishment of a hunter education committee in 1971, now called the Hunter Education and
Shooting Sports Committee.

NATIONAL SHOOTING SPORTS FOUNDATION (NSSF) – Organization supporting the
development of shooters, shooting ranges and hunter education programs; sponsors “National
Hunting and Fishing Day”, last Saturday in September and hunter education training materials.
NSSF sponsors the annual “Shooting and Hunting Outdoor Trade (SHOT) Show,” the biggest
outdoor manufacturer show of its kind for retailers of shooting and hunting products. It also
conducts Shooting Sports & Hunting Research, and “First Shots” and “Project Childsafe” programs.

NATIONAL RIFLE ASSOCIATION (NRA) – Originally formed after the Civil War (Also
known as the “War of Northern Aggression”), to improve marksmanship in the armed forces of the
United States, the organization now works to preserve second amendment rights (…the right to
keep and bear arms…) and support the development of shooters, shooting ranges and hunter
education programs primarily through their education and training division. NRA was the primary
source of hunter safety courses before the state fish and wildlife agencies shouldered the
responsibility and developed the national “Youth Hunter Education Challenge” though its Hunter
Services division. NRA provides Range Technical Team Advisors to inspect rifle ranges, NRA
Range Source manual and hunter education training material, research and information, like NSSF.

SPORTING ARMS & AMMUNITION COMPANIES and OTHER OUTDOOR
INDUSTRIES – Sponsors the “Volunteer Hunter Education Instructor of the Year” and related
national recognition of hunter education instructors; provides training aids/supplies to hunter
education instructors through the state hunter education manager. Discounts are advertised on the
IHEA-USA website.




                                                  9
B. POLICIES
  1. FEDERAL/STATE LAWS
     Federal Guidelines – Program guidelines must adhere to federal guidelines set forth by
     the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Division of Federal Aid. Generally, federal
     statutes deal with titles and codes, which ensure that hunter education courses are available
     and accessible to all people and prevent discrimination in the administration and
     performance of duties in hunter education.

     Federal Laws Applicable to Hunter Education:

          Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 – Prohibits discrimination based on race,
         color, or national origin in any “program or activity receiving Federal financial
         assistance.”
          Section 504 of the 1973 Rehabilitation Act - The first disability civil rights law
         enacted in the United States. It prohibits discrimination against people with disabilities
         in programs that receive federal financial assistance, and sets the stage for enactment
         of the Americans with Disabilities Act.
          Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1991 – Strengthened the Rehabilitation
         Act of 1973 by ensuring that developers and builders modify access and sites to
         accommodate facilities, programs and access for people with disabilities.
          Age Discrimination Act of 1975 – Prohibits discrimination based on age in
         programs or activities receiving Federal financial assistance.
          Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1975 – Prohibits discrimination based
         on sex (gender) in any education program receiving Federal financial assistance.

     State Guidelines – Program guidelines must adhere to statutes and regulations established
     to prohibit many actions already prohibited by federal law such as discrimination and
     ensure the integrity of the program itself. Program statutes generally deal with parameters
     established within the mandatory hunter education statute, Parks and Wildlife Code
     (Section 62.014) – SEE APPENDIX A. Falsification of state records is a particularly
     serious crime and is pursued if an instructor is found to certify an individual who has not
     attended the hunter education course and/or accepts monetary incentives beyond those
     allowed under the fee policy.

  2. TPWD RULES & POLICIES
     Fees - By State statute, the cap on fees charged students within instructor-led courses is
     $15.00. The established fee for an instructor-led course by commission rule also is $15.00.
     Volunteer instructors, including professional educators, are allowed to retain up to $10.00
     per student to defray their necessary out-of-pocket expenses such as travel, refreshments,
     in-service training and postage. TPWD-paid employees must return the entire fee to the
     State to comply with policy and avoid conflicts of interest. This program is not-for-profit
     and instructors may not charge nor accept any fees above the established $15.00 fee.
                                            10
When the hunter education staff receives notice or a report of added fees being charged of
students, the hunter education coordinator will investigate the circumstance involved.

Additional fees may be charged to students if the service or product is not for basic student
course services and are made optional to the student. Examples are parking fees
established for all visitors of a college campus; room rental fee charged of everyone at a
specific facility no matter what the offering; target range charges; hunter education videos;
Hunting 101s such as a Turkey Hunting 101, Shotgun 101, etc. If an instructor has a
question regarding a fee, he/she needs to contact the hunter education coordinator who
will make the final determination whether a fee is appropriate or not.

Donations – Instructors may accept donations on behalf of the program. They may use
donated goods and services in their courses as long as the donations are not for personal
gain. For audit purposes, instructors should document the value and/or name of the
goods or services received for audit purposes. All donated goods and services must relate
to hunter education and adhere to the goals and objectives of the program.

Instructors also may accept donations on behalf of the statewide program. Cash donations
may either be sent to the Parks and Wildlife Foundation of Texas, Inc., Attn: Hunter
Education or to the Texas Hunter Education Instructors Association, a support non-profit
dedicated to the enhancement of instructor and program goals. Goods and services can be
sent to Texas Parks and Wildlife for distribution to Hunter Education Staff, Area Chiefs
and/or instructors depending on the nature and quantity of the donation. The Hunter
Education Coordinator should be contacted for specific details and at any time significant
donations are offered or received.

Performance – Instructors are expected to perform at a high level. Based on past
evaluations, hunter education volunteer instructor performance has been high in Texas and
throughout North America. Still, there are times when the hunter education staff gets
evaluations/reports on instructors who lecture and/or read from a manual, who exhibit
unprofessional behavior and/or are not performing at a desirable standard. When a report
is received, the hunter education coordinator will immediately investigate the
circumstances and make recommendations to the instructor for improvement or a change
in volunteer services provided. It may be that the instructor can perform other services
that help the program grow such as administrative, research and curriculum development.


Records – Instructors must use the current, prescribed ONLINE REGISTRATION
SYSTEM (ORS) (SEE CHAPTER III – ORS) to properly record student and instructor
participation in a course or program. Records are vital to the long-term success of the
program to provide hunters with the best possible service now and in the future.




                                        11
3. TEXAS HUNTER EDUCATION PROGRAMS
   Basic Hunter Education Course – An instructor’s primary role is to provide hunter
   education STUDENT courses to the public -- a six-hour CLASSROOM course or four-
   hour (min.) FIELD course (with proof of Free TPWD/NRA Internet Course
   completion).

   *NEW* Hunting 101 Seminars, Workshops & Mentored Hunts – Instructors can
   provide advanced hunter education opportunities to the public including method-specific
   courses (i.e. bow hunting, black powder, modern sporting rifles, handguns, crossbows) and
   species-specific courses (i.e. waterfowl, deer, small game, upland game, hog and turkey).
   Instructors may charge and additional $15 (keeping $10 per student) for providing these
   opportunities, and should use the ORS to properly record registrations and fees.
   Bowhunter education instructors must also use the ORS system to properly record
   students that take bowhunter education required in many other states to bow hunt in those
   jurisdictions. When representing TPWD in advanced hunter education, instructors are
   expected to maintain high standards and adhere to all policies and procedures.

   Bowhunter Education Program – An advanced hunter education program that is treated
   separately then Hunting 101s and other advanced efforts is the MANDATORY
   BOWHUNTER EDUCATION PROGRAM required in many states prior to bow
   hunters legally bow hunting in those jurisdictions. For this reason, Bowhunter Education is
   treated within the same context of hunter education, having its own unique set of
   curricula, practices and procedures in accordance with National Education Standards
   (SEE Chapter II) established by the IHEA-USA.

   Outreach and Special Events – Instructors are called upon to teach basic firearm safety,
   home firearm safety and special topics such as wilderness survival to elementary schools,
   boy scouts, corporations and similar groups. Instructors also participate in local and
   statewide camps and events where live-firing plays an integral part of the hands-on
   activities. When representing TPWD at outreach and related special events, instructors are
   expected to maintain high standards and adhere to all policies and procedures.

   Area Chiefs – Along with providing basic hunter education course to the public, the
   primary duty of an Area Chief is to recruit and train local instructors by conducting the
   Hunter Education INSTRUCTOR Courses. A secondary duty is to monitor and assist
   local instructors. Finally, Area Chiefs should host periodic meetings for instructors and/or
   the hunting/shooting public in their area to enhance existing efforts and get to know one
   another. Hunter Education Staff are available to assist Area Chiefs in their roles and duties.




                                           12
4. HUNTER EDUCATION INSTRUCTORS
   Area Chiefs
    Area Chiefs are volunteers who not only teach hunter education, but they are also
      trained to teach instructors and monitor local efforts.
    Area Chiefs review program material, assist in policymaking, and, at times, are called
      upon to help coordinate in-service training opportunities.
    Area Chiefs are the spinal cord of the backbone.
    Area Chiefs are available in the local area to assist volunteer instructors deliver quality
      courses to the public.

   Volunteers
    Volunteers are the backbone of the Texas Hunter Education Program. State
      mandated programs would be very difficult to accomplish without their assistance.
    State uses “in-kind value” from volunteer labor to match federal funds at a ratio of
      25:75, state/federal shares.
    Value of volunteer labor is equivalent to a beginning trainer’s pay (e.g. $24.00 per
      hour).
    Volunteers are in the “give back” stage are motivated to teach hunter education for a
      variety of reasons. (Rarely is it for monetary gain.)

   Professional Educators (e.g. Agriculture Science & Outdoor Education Teachers)
    In Texas, teachers play a vital role in the hunter education program, training between
      30-40% of students on an annual basis.
    Agriculture Science and Outdoor Education/PE teachers comprise the dominant
      percentage in this category and teach hunter education in association with an
      established curriculum in middle and high schools, sometimes as part of suite of
      programs such as TPWD angler, boater and archery training programs.
    Teachers are volunteers for TPWD and many conduct “voluntary” courses outside of
      the school curriculum, within their communities.

   Game Wardens/TPWD Employees
    Game wardens and other TPWD employees are certified as hunter education
     instructors during their cadet and other professional development training at TPWD.
    Game wardens conduct and initial interviews and background investigations on behalf
     of Hunter Education, primarily for instructors to get to know their local wardens.
    A game warden’s best role is to attend local courses offered by volunteers and assist by
     giving game law presentations or participating in field/live-firing activities. Students
     like to ask game wardens questions, making for lively discussions. The game warden’s
     primary purpose is to educate people and enforce the fish and wildlife laws of Texas.




                                           13
5. INSTRUCTORS SHOULD:

      Maintain dignity/integrity of TPWD with the public.
      Be committed to the Texas Hunter Education Program.
      Accept guidance/decisions of the Hunter Education Coordinator, Hunter Education
       staff and from Area Chiefs.
      Help improve program, policies and procedures when needed.
      Complete records as prescribed in the new ORS – Online Registration System.
      Involve others and solicit help, support and sponsorship from local resources.
      Teach or use only that material found on the TPWD web site online course or
       only that material found in the Texas Hunter Education Manual (Today’s Hunter or
       Bowhunter in Texas) and other approved materials (Hunting 101, Today’s Crossbow,
       etc.).
      Know the subject and prepare hands-on activities to the greatest extent possible.
      Be available to teach at least one course every year, certifying at least five (5) students.
      Develop/acquire the necessary training supplies to give hands-on learning activities.
      Maintain a professional demeanor and attitude at all times.
      Be punctual, dependable and carry out duties promptly and reliably.
      Be positive, taking students from known to unknown, from simple to complex.
      Be friendly, warm and courteous to all students, parents and fellow instructors.
      Be neat in appearance and dress appropriately.
      Be accurate with facts and strive to learn all one can about the subject matters.
      Refrain from the use of alcoholic beverages, illegal drugs, smoking and/or tobacco
       products before and, especially, during a course.
      Refrain from the use of profanities, obscenities and negative behavior or gestures.
      Try not to use terms like “weapon,” “slaughter” or other words that give a negative
       connotation to shooting sports and/or to hunting.
      Refrain from stating personal and political opinions or philosophies, especially any that
       may conflict with the mission and purpose of TPWD/Hunter Education Program.
      Evaluate efforts! Constantly try to improve on performance as well as the performance
       of the team.
      Attend the annual instructor’s conference and in-service training workshops and
       scheduled meetings to improve performance and to receive updates on the program.
      Notify the hunter education staff any time there is a problem and/or conflict and/or
       communicate directly with others to resolve issues (instead of “bad-mouthing” others).
      Be available to teach people about firearm safety, conservation, outdoor skills and
       other hunter education topics when called upon by the community.
      Be available to volunteer for outreach opportunities, such as: shooting events; outdoor
       and Boy/Girl Scout camps, local fairs; exhibitions and shows; or at state parks.

  “TPWD is committed to train and maintain an active, informed and well–supported
  mandatory Hunter Education Program.”




                                            14
6. INSTRUCTOR POLICIES
  Volunteers are treated the same as Texas Parks and Wildlife Department employees,
  except that volunteers do not receive remuneration for their services. Professional
  educators must adhere to personnel policies and procedures established within the Texas
  Education Code and/or private school codes. Personnel policies and procedures can be
  summarized in the following standards of behavior:

     Job Description - Instructors are given the job of presenting the curriculum to
      students in the best manner possible, which is considered to be hands-on, actual
      and/or simulated experiences.

     Performance Standards and Review – Instructors are expected to teach at least one
      course every year, certifying a minimum of five (5) students, to meet the minimum
      standard. TPWD Hunter Education Staff and/or Area Chiefs may conduct periodic
      evaluations of the instructors to improve the quality of instruction and insure
      compliance of all standards of behavior.

       Note: The ORS System automatically updates/renews instructor certification cards
      upon meeting the minimum annual requirement (teaching a course and certifying five
      students). Any instructor failing to conduct at least one course every year will
      automatically go inactive in two years. Instructors must contact their regional staff if
      they notice that they are inactive and cannot access their ORS account.

                 o Inactivity for a period of two (2) to five (5) years requires the
                   individual to meet with his/her regional hunter education staff to
                   review the instructor manual and to ensure applicant adheres to
                   current program, policies and procedures.

                 o Inactivity for a period of more than five (5) years requires the
                   individual to retake the Instructor Course and update his/her
                   application forms as necessary.

     Environmental/Conservation Awareness – Hunter education courses are exempted
      from conditions stated within the Environmental Protection Act except insofar as a
      constructed range facility does not contaminate a wetland. Hunter education
      instructors are encouraged to educate students about conservation including topics
      such as wildlife conservation, the use of mandatory non-toxic shot while waterfowl
      hunting and “wounding loss” and how to improve wing shooting abilities.

     Sexual Harassment – Criminal Penalty – It is unlawful to harass any fellow
      instructor, student or parent, solicit sexual favors and/or use any other verbal or
      physical conduct of a sexual nature, or make it a term or condition of passage of the
      course.

     Drug- Alcohol – Tobacco Free Work Place - Instructors will not use or possess
      alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs on duty time, when in an instructor uniform, on
      coffee breaks or on any state-owned or controlled property including state vehicles or
                                          15
    during training workshops. Instructors will refrain from using all tobacco products
    during courses.

   Dress and Appearance – Instructors are expected to present a professional
    appearance and to dress appropriately for their position. Wear nametags over the
    right breast pocket area. Instructors should only wear patches provided by the
    department on caps, shirts or vests for teaching, or placed on either sleeve or over
    the left breast pocket of a shirt. NRA training certification patches may be worn,
    but no manufacturer or industry patches are allowed.

   Conflict of Interest – Instructors may not accept personal gifts, favors or services
    that influence their discharge of duties. Duties include teaching one course each year
    and recommending five or more students for certification. Instructors also should not
    represent a group or themselves in another capacity while teaching hunter education if
    the position they take is in conflict with the mission, goals and purpose of TPWD or
    the hunter education program.


   Hunting 101s and Mentor/Youth Hunt Programs – Hunter Education Instructors
    may dually represent both TPWD Hunter Education and any of its official partners
    (“Partners in Conservation” Agreements. Partners include, but are not limited to:
    Texas Hunter Education Instructor‘s Association (THEIA), Texas Youth Hunting
    Program (TYHP); Texas 4-H Natural Resources/Shooting Sports; Outdoor
    Tomorrows Foundation, Conservation Groups (e.g. Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation,
    National Wild Turkey Federation, Pheasants/Quail Forever, Duck’s Unlimited) and
    local sporting groups (e.g. Woods & Waters) to extend the mission of safe, responsible
    hunting.

   Use of State Property/Facilities – State property or other resources (e.g. training
    aids) provided to instructors by the state will not be diverted to personal use and
    should be returned to TPWD upon retirement or termination from the program. An
    exemption to this is an “incentive award” considered personal property upon award by
    the State.

   Insubordination – Instructors are expected to follow all instructions issued by hunter
    education program staff unless 1) the instructions are outside of professional standards,
    2) the instructions would endanger the health and welfare of students and instructors,
    or 3) the instructions would require the performance of an illegal act.

   Work Rules – Instructors are expected to be prompt and efficient in the performance
    of their duties. Instructors will not cancel any courses without due notice to all
    concerned, including students and TPWD headquarters.

   Standards of Trust – No instructor shall knowingly falsify or alter any report,
    document or record. Instructors shall adhere to basic principles of honesty and
    maintain the highest of ethical standards. Instructors shall not use their position as
    TPWD hunter education instructor for personal gain. This does not include products
    or services that directly benefit the program and/or students in a positive way, such as
                                          16
    a donation of refreshments, training aids or materials that reinforce the hunter
    education curriculum.

   Courtesy – Instructors shall be courteous to all callers, students, parents, fellow
    instructors, hunter education staff and TPWD employees associated with the Texas
    Hunter Education Program. Instructors must maintain a helpful attitude towards the
    public at all times.

   Competence – Instructors shall be physically and mentally able to perform the
    essential duties of the position with or without reasonable accommodation, as defined
    by the American with Disabilities Act.

   Care – Instructors shall exercise care and observe all safety and security rules in proper
    performance of their job. They must be role models and strictly adhere to all
    principles of sporting arm safety (“Ten Commandments of Shooting Safety”) being taught to
    students in the Texas Hunter Education Program.

   Notification – If an instructor violates any of the aforementioned policies or rules,
    TPWD hunter education staff should be immediately notified and appropriate
    corrective action taken. Instructors must accept responsibility for decisions made and
    action taken based on these decisions. Instructors have the right to appeal these
    decisions, as stated under “Corrective Action.”

   Corrective Action – Disciplinary action can take five forms:

    1) No action – when the accusation is unwarranted or unsubstantiated;

    2) Verbal Warning – Hunter education coordinator issues a verbal reprimand for
    corrective behavior;

    3) Written Warning - Hunter education coordinator issues written reprimand for
    corrective behavior;

    4) Probation – Hunter education coordinator and/or local law enforcement staff meet
    with instructor and mutually decide on a corrective action plan; usually a six-month to
    one-year probationary term;

    5) Termination – Instructor verbally and in writing is immediately dismissed from the
    program. Actions that cause immediate termination are typically serious in nature such
    as sexual harassment, violations of the Texas Penal Code, and/or violations of Texas
    game laws. TPWD employees terminated for cause and who are hunter education
    instructors, will be dismissed from the hunter education program.

   Termination – Instructors performing at an undesirable level, found to be in violation
    of hunting or fishing regulations, or exhibiting any undesirable behaviors, can be
    terminated based on the determination that his/her services are unsatisfactory or no
    longer needed.

                                        17
      Appeal – An instructor may appeal a decision by the hunter education coordinator by
       writing the Outreach & Education Director, Texas Parks and Wildlife, 4200 Smith
       School Rd., Austin, TX 78744. Once a letter is received, a review panel comprised of a
       volunteer, a TPWD law enforcement representative and the Outreach & Education
       Director will review the circumstances and make a final TPWD determination.

7. RISK MANAGEMENT, LIABILITY AND INSURANCE
   Risk Management is a learned ability to study, recognize and evaluate the health and
   safety risks of a program activity or task and develop a plan for accomplishing it in the
   safest possible way by:
         Reducing the risks through training,
         Transferring risks to a third party (insurance), or
         Avoiding all or part of the activity/task altogether

   Risk Management in Hunter Education is to create a safe learning environment:

       Classroom
        No live ammunition
        Meets ADA standards - preferable
        Neatly arranged
        Adequately lighted
        Safe, comfortable seating
        Restroom(s) available
        Maintain discipline

       Outdoor activities
        No live ammunition
        Students prepared, informed, organized into manageable groups and checked
        Attention to outdoor conditions – weather, insects, poisonous plants and animals
        Attention to terrain – aware of hazards – traversing terrain safely
        Maintain discipline

       Use of firearms, archery equipment and other field equipment
        Ammunition dispensed and used under close supervision of instructor
        Use and emphasize “Ten Commandments of Hunting Safety”
        Use and emphasize black powder and bow hunting safety rules
        Safe background/backstop
        Hearing and eye protection required for small bore and big bore rifles, handguns
          and shotgun live fire exercises
        Give instruction on the safe use of any equipment used (knife, elevated blind, air
          gun, ATV, etc.)
        Swing and/or elevation “muzzle restrictors” for all firearms as necessary to
          establish a safe shooting zone/backstop/background at the live fire facilities
        Maintain discipline
                                         18
Liability (Responsibility) - Components necessary to reduce risks or limit liability
              Application
              Background investigation
              Pre-service training – student and instructor
              Uniform testing
              Job performance
              Program, instructor and student, evaluation
              Policy and procedures manual
              Adherence to guidelines
              Documentation (written)
              Preparation and emergency preparedness
              Demonstration of skills (students and instructors)
              Demonstrated understanding of safety rules
              Signed (understood) releases

Rules to reduce risks in hunter education programs
            Department/Employees
             Provide application, background investigation and pre-service training for
                volunteer instructors
             Provide standardized instructor and student manuals
             Provide in-service training
             Evaluate program, instructors and students
             Adhere to federal, state and program policies and procedures
             Provide student training in safe, responsible use of sporting arms

            Instructors
             Use live ammunition only during controlled, supervised live-firing exercises
                Only use “dummy ammunition” at all other times throughout the course
             Follow guidelines established in Instructor Manual - Policies and Procedures
             Follow philosophy and outline of student manuals provided by department
             Do not allow students to bring their own firearms or ammunition to course and
                pre-inspect all firearms used at youth/mentor hunts and Hunting 101 coursework
             Plan for first-aid situations and general emergency preparedness

   8. HUNTER EDUCATION FIREARM POLICY
         To reemphasize SAFETY in hunter education, NO LOADED FIREARMS NOR
                LIVE AMMUNITION ARE ALLOWED in or during hunter education
                activities, classroom or field experience EXCEPT DURING LIVE-FIRE
                EXERCISES at a safe range or during an actual hunt (e.g. youth, mentor).

                 Exception: Law Enforcement officers, such as game wardens, in uniform
                 and on duty at the time of hunter education activity

                                              19
             Hunter education activities include outreach events, classroom and field instruction -
                 - including demonstrations of safe firearm storage, handling and/or
                 transportation (i.e. unloaded, actions open/cased and separate from ammunition).
             Inert “dummy ammo” is provided by TPWD in common sizes for classroom and
                 field activities. (Dummy ammo must be clearly marked as such for use in training
                 exercises.)
             Inert “dummy firearms” (orange Remington/Mossberg) that include five (5) different
                 action designs are available for direct purchase (Mossberg) or loan from TPWD
                 headquarters and regional hunter education staff.
             Only new, factory ammunition must be used during live-fire activities or hunts (i.e.
                 no hand-loaded/customized ammunition).
             Instructors should direct participants of youth/mentor hunts to ensure that their
                 firearms are UNLOADED and allow for proper inspection any firearms or
                 ammunition brought to the hunts.

  NOTE: Instructors must immediately report any unlawful actions, theft, property
  damage, personal injury or death to the proper authorities and to the hunter education
  manager.      In the event of an emergency, instructors must secure the safety of
  individual(s) in their care, perform first aid/CPR, notify emergency services and secure
  the scene.

  RULING - Texas Supreme Court has held that volunteer hunter education instructors may be individually
  liable for negligent acts and cannot look to a government unit for indemnification or legal representation.
  {Harris County v. Dillard, 883 SW2d 166 (1994)}

   Conviction of negligence requires these four elements:
            Legal Duty: Protect participants from unreasonable risk of harm
            The Act: Failure to act with that degree of care of a reasonable and prudent person
            Proximate Cause: Breach of the standard of care caused the injury
            Damage: Physical or emotional injury to an individual or property resulted

APPENDIX C – FIREARM AUTHORIZATION LETTER

  9. VOLUNTEER INSURANCE

  In view of this ruling, TPWD provides volunteers with personal liability insurance coverage at a
  limit of $1,000,000 per occurrence. This policy provides protection for a personal injury or a
  property damage liability claim arising out of the performance of the volunteer’s duties. This
  coverage is in excess of and non-contributing with any other valid and collectible insurance the
  volunteer may have, e.g. Homeowner’s Liability Insurance is the primary insurance if available,
  otherwise this policy becomes the primary policy. TPWD recommends that all volunteer
  instructors additionally obtain volunteer instructor liability insurance through IHEA-USA.ORG
  (member).




                                                   20
Principal exclusions to volunteer liability insurance
          Injury or damage arising out of the use of a TPWD-owned automobile, aircraft or
             watercraft
          Errors or omissions in connection with the volunteer’s professional services;
             (stresses the importance of covering all areas of instruction)
          Personal injury resulting from assault and battery committed by or at the direction of
             the volunteer
          Property damage to property in the care, custody or control of the volunteer
          Injury or damage by any person who is part of, or associated with, a work release or
             court ordered program

         What does “excess coverage” mean?
         A volunteer will be reimbursed within the limits of the volunteer policies for covered
         expenses that exceed the volunteer’s own insurance coverage.

         Is a volunteer covered if operating a TPWD vehicle?
         Volunteers are covered ONLY by the medical accident policy when operating a
         TPWD vehicle (auto, truck) or watercraft. This excess coverage is limited to $50,000
         in medical expenses incurred by the volunteer. There is NO liability insurance
         coverage for a volunteer operating a TPWD vehicle or watercraft.

         Is a volunteer covered while operating a personal vehicle?
         The insurance company interprets the volunteer excess liability policy to NOT cover
         any accidents where the volunteer is driving an automobile, including personal
         automobiles. The excess auto liability policy DOES cover volunteers driving
         automobiles, ONLY if it is their personal auto; this policy covers volunteer damage to
         a third party caused by operation of the volunteer’s own motor vehicle (owned or
         leased) or temporary rental vehicle. This coverage requires a volunteer to have his/her
         own automobile coverage (state statutory minimum) and will pay the third party’s
         damages only if they exceed the limits of the volunteer’s coverage.

         Can a volunteer operate a TPWD-owned watercraft?
         There is no coverage under the volunteer excess liability policy for a volunteer
         operating a TPWD-owned watercraft. A volunteer would be covered for his or her
         own injuries, but not injuries or liability to others. As a result, volunteers should not
         be allowed to operate TPWD-owned watercraft.

         Can a volunteer operate his or her personally owned watercraft?
         The excess liability policy will cover a volunteer operating personally owned (non-
         TPWD) watercraft that are less than 26 feet long, as long as they are not carrying
         passengers for a charge.

Waivers, Releases, Agreements and Contracts

Each student under age 17 and/or their parent or guardian, and all other participants must
register through the Online Registration System and acknowledge by registration the risks
inherent to attending a classroom or field/live-fire course as provided by the department and its
trained representatives (instructors).
                                              21
Note: In cases where the student and/or parent(s) are dissatisfied with participation in the
program, instructors should immediately handle the situation by meeting with the participant(s)
away from others and/or invite participant(s) to write TPWD with their concern(s). The
instructor should immediately notify the TPWD Hunter Education Staff.

APPENDIX E – Field Exercises, and APPENDIX G – Live-Fire Exercises, include sample
waivers that instructors can use to communicate more clearly the risks involved in such
activities. Primary purpose for such waivers is to help students understand risks related to
hunter education activities, but do not absolve negligent actions or behaviors by instructors.

10. PROGRAM PROVISIONS

a. Instructor and Student Supplies & Materials – Instructors are provided supplies and
   materials necessary to teach the basic student courses and Hunting 101s and properly record
   each course or event. Instructors are part of an Online Registration System where they set
   up course locations, courses, print attendance rosters, mark attendance/grades, log
   prep/taught times and pay for courses. They also can track their incentive points and issue
   temporary student certificates when they are unable to pay immediately with a credit card
   upon course completion. TPWD provides Area Chiefs and bowhunter education instructors
   with additional materials to teach instructor/bowhunter coursework.

b. Communications – Each Instructor is provided with ongoing communications:

       Hunter Education Staff – Regional staff conducts annual meetings and many
        workshops (e.g. Hunting 101s; trapper and bowhunter education) in each of their
        regions to give hunter and bowhunter education instructors added, more proximal and
        convenient, updates and program information.

       Annual Instructor Conference, Regional Meetings & Workshops – Instructors
        should attend the annual conference and training/professional seminars/workshops, to
        hear from national experts, receive due recognition for their achievements, and, in some
        cases, receive annual awards such as statewide/regional volunteer/professional educator
        of the year, HALL OF FAME and other incentive awards, etc.

       Target Talk – Monthly Target Talk E-newsletters and quarterly newsletters
        (publication), either emailed or mailed, provide current information to instructors that
        include recognition, training opportunities, instructor profiles, special events, new
        instructor lists, certified and other information vital to the overall program success.
        Instructors are encouraged to read each newsletter so they do not miss
        important updates. Copies of past issues are at the TPWD hunter education web site.

       Special Mailings - From time to time, instructors receive special mailings and/or
        communications via email, phone or during training workshops and special events.
        THEIA newsletter, TYHP program, NASP news and other partner information is
        included with instructor newsletter when provided to TPWD for inclusion.


                                            22
c. Record Keeping – TPWD provides an Online Registration System (ORS) and
   DATABASE services to keep track of all instructors and students certified in hunter
   education. It also keeps track of instructor incentive awards based on cumulative point
   totals.


d. Publicity and Promotions – TPWD has an extensive communications network with local
   media outlets including television, radio and news. TPWD releases monthly hunter
   education information via the Internet and direct mail. Local newspapers typically relate
   local course information, especially those courses prior to or during the hunting seasons.
   Other special reports, such as hunting incident/accident reports, are of special interest to the
   media. Reporters call local instructors many times to add or verify hunter education efforts
   in the area.


e. Recognition – Upon being certified, instructors receive a congratulatory letter, instructor
   patch, instructor ID card, and nametag suitable to have name engraved. HE Staff recognizes
   instructors through Target Talk newsletter, in local newspapers and with the incentive award
   program that allows TPWD to thank instructors for their efforts. HE Staff also nominated
   instructors for a regional, state or national “Instructor of the Year” Awards and related
   awards at the annual THEIA/IHEA-USA (state/national) conferences and meetings.


f. Special Events – TPWD annually coordinates and conducts outreach programs, events &
   activities around the state and offer further opportunities to instructors –giving them a
   chance to be honored at local fairs, festivals and other outreach events.


g. Instructor Courses – TPWD Hunter Education staff and Area Chief Hunter Education
   Instructors provide basic instructor training courses for applicants interested in teaching
   hunter education in their areas. Approximately 35% of all trainees go on to teach hunter
   education. TPWD loses over 150 instructors each year to attrition (e.g. Inactivity,
   relocation).


h. In-Service Training – TPWD provides in-service training opportunities related to topics
   offered in the basic and advanced (i.e. Hunting 101s) student courses including:
      Ethics, Game Laws and Responsibility & Wildlife Management and Conservation
      Outdoor Skills/Survival & Wilderness First Aid/CPR
      Bowhunter Education (National Bowhunter Education Foundation)
      Muzzleloader Education (National Muzzle Loading Rifle/National Rifle Assns.)
      Trapper Education (Texas Trappers and Fur Hunters Assn.)
      Hunting 101 species-specific seminars, workshops & mentor hunts (White-tailed
         Deer, Doves, Upland Game, Turkey, Waterfowl, Feral Hogs, Alligators)
      Hunting 101 method-specific seminars, workshops & mentor hunts (Trapping,
         Modern Sporting Arms, Rifle, Shotgun, Handgun, Air Guns, Bows, Crossbows)
      Wing Shooting Responsibility & Awareness
      National Student Air Rifle Shooting Program (Student Air Rifle – SAR - Program)
      National Archery in the Schools Program (National Archery in Schools Program)
                                             23
i. Instructor Levels

        Assistant Instructor – Individuals must be ages fifteen (15) through twenty (20), take
         the student course and complete the same application requirements of a Hunter
         Education Instructor. Assistants must work under direct supervision of a sponsoring
         instructor. Assistants will receive the same incentive points as the sponsoring
         instructor per class. If the assistant remains active, upon turning twenty-one (21)
         he/she will automatically become a fully certified instructor.

        Basic Instructor – Instructors that conduct a minimum of one (1) Hunter
         Education STUDENT course per year and certify a minimum of five (5)
         students per year are automatically renewed. HE Staff automatically deactivate
         instructors every two (2) years for inaction. Instructors receive email notices for
         inactivity.

        Master Instructor – Instructors must attend three (3) Hunting 101 Workshops (8
         hours – classroom and field as taught by TPWD Hunter Education Staff/Area Chiefs/
         and/or other Instructor Resource Experts such as Industry Partners, Game Wardens
         and/or Biologists (e.g. turkey, deer, dove, hog, waterfowl, upland game, small game,
         shotgun, handgun, rifle, survival, trapping, bow hunting, crossbow, etc.)

         o MASTER - Instructor must teach one Hunting 101 workshop (8 hours - classroom
            & field) OR two (2) Hunting 101 seminars (4 hours – classroom only) on an
            annual basis (min.) to remain an Active Master Instructor.

        Area Chief Instructor – Instructors who have completed three (3) years as a
         Hunter Education Instructor and have certified a minimum of 50 students (or
         gained 100 Incentive Award Points). Area Chief Applicants must complete an
         application package and be recommended by a regional Hunter Education Specialist
         and a game warden in their count(ies) of responsibility (on the application). Area
         Chiefs must be willing to take on added duties in the program and assist Hunter
         Education staff as needed with events, Hunting 101 workshops, courses and related
         duties.

         To remain at that level, Area chief must annually teach one (1) instructor course
         and/or teach a minimum of three (3) new instructors per year, and attend the annual
         Instructor conference/Area Chief meeting or regional meeting. With approval from
         HE Staff, Area Chief may substitute another workshop/event for the annual meeting
         requirement.

j. Tenure Pins – Instructors receive hat/lapel pins recognizing their years of service in the
   Texas Hunter Education Program (upon attending first Hunting 101/in-service workshop or
   conference - 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35 and 40 years of service.

k. Hunting Accident/Incident Data – TPWD tracks and monitors all Texas hunting
   accidents and reports them annually to the IHEA, the organization which officially reports
                                           24
   hunting accidents nationally to the IHEA-USA (e.g. media, National Safety council and to
   legislative and judicial branches of government). Note: Game Wardens are responsible for
   investigating accidents/incidents, completing accident/incident report forms and sending
   them to the Education Director, TPWD, for compilation. Hunting accident/incident data
   and trends are useful for sharing within the hunter education process to help hunters prevent
   similar incidents and to review causes and safety standards. Reports can be found online at:
   http://tpwd.texas.gov/publications/learning/hunter_education/

l. Instructor Discounts – Sporting Goods manufacturers offer discounts to hunter education
   instructors on items and materials used in hunter education coursework. TPWD notifies
   instructors about current discounts in the Target Talk newsletter and/or by email, or
   instructors may consult www.ihea-usa.org web site.

m. INCENTIVE AWARD Program – “Incentive Awards” are TPWD’s way of annually
   thanking hunter education instructors for their involvement in the program. HE Program
   recognizes top award recipients during an Annual Instructor Conference & Banquet co-
   sponsored by THEIA. HE Staff mails all other awards and points are earned as follows:

      Assistant/Basic/Master Hunter Education Instructors:
        o Instructor Certification – 25 Points
        o Students Taught
            2 Points per student (Classroom courses)
            3 points per student (Field Courses)
        o Tenure - 10 points per year (Minimum 5 students certified per year)
        o Hunting 101s, THEIA/Advanced Workshops and Outreach Events (HE
           Activities) and Mentor/Youth Hunts – 3 Points per Volunteer Hour

      Area Chiefs:
        o Area Chief Certification – 50 points
        o Tenure - 15 point per year (Minimum 3 instructors taught per year)
        o Instructors Taught - 5 points per instructor taught

                    Point Level                          Award
                    _____ 25 Students                    HE Flashlight or equivalent
                    _____ 50 Students                    HE Book (e.g. Blood on the Leaves)
                    _____ 100 Points                     Orange Cap & Vest
                    _____ 200 Points                     Gun Cleaning Kit
                    _____ 300 Points                     Game Processing Kit
                    _____ 500 Points                     Belt Buckle/TPWD Gift Item
                    _____ 750 Points                     Custom Leather/TPWD Gift Item
                    _____ 1000 Points                    Hunter Ed Brief Case
                    _____ 1,500 Points                   HE Print, Gun Case
                    _____ 2,000 Points                   HE Custom Knife
                    _____ 2,500 Points                   Handgun * Gift Card (THEIA)
                    _____ 3,000 Points                   Rifle * Gift Card (THEIA)
                    _____ 3,500 Points                   Shotgun * Gift Card (THEIA)
                    _____ 4,500 Points                   TX Hunter Ed **HALL OF FAME**
                    25 Years of Service                  LEGACY AWARD (Donated Hunt)
                                            25
C.     PROCEDURES
     1. BECOMING A HUNTER EDUCATION INSTRUCTOR
Potential hunter education instructors must complete the procedures and steps as outlined in the
HUNTER EDUCATION INSTRUCTOR COURSE PACKET. Steps include:
           Basic Hunter Education STUDENT Course (Whether exempt –born prior to 9-2-71 – or not)
           Hunter Education INSTRUCTOR APPLICATION PACKET
           GAME WARDEN INTERVIEW
           MUTUAL AGREEMENT - Professional educators teaching in schools
           Hunter and/or Bowhunter Education INSTRUCTOR COURSE

     2. ORDERING SUPPLIES
Any time an instructor needs materials for courses, he/she MUST:
              Complete the prescribed supply order form (PWD 183) as found at the instructor’s Online
               Registration System (ORS) Dashboard, or the new SHOPPING CART as it is developed on
               the same system.
              Email the form to Supply.Request@tpwd.texas.gov or use the new SHOPPING CART as it
               is developed on the ORS.
              Note: You should order supplies at least one (1) month prior to course start
               date and inspect them immediately upon arrival. For any items not shipped, please
               notify Austin hunter education staff immediately.

     3. PREPARING FOR A COURSE
        a. Choosing a Class Site – The ideal site is a facility that provides an adequate indoor
           and/or outdoor classroom adjacent to an outdoor area conducive for field and live-
           firing exercises. The site should be inspected for hazards that should be removed or
           marked. It should be spacious enough to host a 20-25 student course. The site should
           facilitate as many hands-on activities as possible. Sites, outdoor trails and shooting
           facilities should be accessible to people with disabilities.

              Note: TPWD recognizes the importance of providing constituents with
              unrestricted access to agency programs and facilities. As such, instructors
              should schedule educational courses (to the greatest extent possible) at locations
              allowing the greatest accessibility for people with disabilities. Instructors will
              coordinate with local disability services and transportation contacts to ensure
              accessible transportation is made available as needed.

        b. Supplies and Materials – Be sure to secure materials and supplies for your course a
           minimum of one (1) month prior to the course start date. Try not to hoard supplies.
           Plan ahead. Try to secure free educational publications that are consistent with the
           established learning objectives or standards. Items such as pencils and license holders
           are valued by students and reminds them of their course experience well after the
           course is given.
                                                 26
c. Classroom Courses (6 Hours) – Classrooms also should be inspected for hazards and
   be accessible to people with disabilities. Students should have tables to write on when
   taking notes or completing written exercises and exams. There must be no live
   ammunition in the classroom at any time. Instructors and students must also
   exhibit care and caution around sharp objects such as knives, archery
   broadheads and other hunting gear/equipment. Instructors should only use
   “Dummy Ammunition” provided by TPWD (as available) and always cover
   broadheads and other sharp objects with archery quivers, sheaths and other
   protective covers. The adage, “Leave classrooms better than you found them” will go
   a long way to securing a permanent site for volunteer-led courses. Professional
   educators in schools have the added option of storing and exhibiting posters and
   models over longer periods of time.

   Classroom courses are typically six (6) hours over one day and held indoors.
   Professional educators, who have students over a semester of studies, typically teach
   two weeks, but many extend their courses to teach additional topics. All classroom
   and field instructors must conduct a minimum of six (6) skill exercises
   including, but not limited to, the following objectives:

   1) MUZZLE CONTROL – Point muzzle in a safe direction while inspecting to see
       if a (dummy) firearm is loaded/unloaded; safely passing firearm to another person
   2) TREATING ALL FIREARMS AS IF THEY ARE LOADED – Safely inspect
       various action types of (dummy) firearms and demonstrate safe loading and
       unloading procedures (See #1 SKILL.)
   3) ACTIONS OPEN AT ALL TIMES and FINGERS OFF TRIGGER – When not in
       the act of hunting/shooting, demonstrate handling, transporting, casing,
       crossing obstacles/fences and/or storing firearms in a safe manner at all times
       (See #1 and #2 SKILLS.)
   4) SAFE FIELD CARRIES – Safety demonstrate safe field carries including TWO-
       HAND, shoulder, trail, cradle, elbow and sling carries (See #1, #2, and #3
       SKILLS.)
   5) HUNTER JUDGEMENT – Safely demonstrate swinging a shotgun within a safe
       zone of fire, inspecting beyond/in front of a target and being sure of the
       target/game being hunted prior to raising the firearms to the target –using
       binoculars (See #1, #2, #3 and #4 SKILLS.)
   6) TREE STAND SAFETY – Safely demonstrate or stress the importance of using a
       safety harness, climbing system and haul line while hunting from an elevated
       position.

   TPWD provides a standardized one-hour CLASSROOM Power Point presentation at the
   Instructor Resources page (TPWD Web Site) and in the Instructor Congrats Packet.
   GOALS & TOP TEN ISSUES (at APPENDIX D) serve as guide to prioritize the
   LESSONS (at APPENDIX E) taught in the classroom. Teaching what is in the
   manual is of utmost importance – avoiding any topic outside the scope of the course,
   including what is in the approved student materials for the BASIC COURSE or
   materials provided by TPWD as part of ADVANCED Hunter Education Courses.


                                       27
APPENDIX D – COURSE GOALS and “TOP TEN” ISSUES
APPENDIX E – COURSE STRUCTURE and LESSON PLANS

      d. Field Courses (Min. 4 Hours) – Set up all field exercises using principles and
         practices set forth in the Standards of Field & Live-Fire Exercises found in
         APPENDICES F, G and H). Plan to finish setting up the field and live-fire exercises
         an hour prior to starting the course. Make sure students are adequately dressed (pre-
         notices) for outdoor activities. Have sunscreen, insect repellent (mosquitoes, fire ants,
         chiggers, etc.) and a first-aid kit on hand for all outdoor activities. Be sure students
         know where the first-aid kit is located. (A fanny pack on the lead instructor may be
         best.)

         Field Courses MUST contain the following components:
              Hunter Skills Trail (See APPENDICES F & G.)
              Live-Fire Exercises (See APPENDIX H.)
              Game Laws, Hunter Responsibility & Ethics (See APPENDIX I.)
              Final Exam (See CHAPTER II Forms & Materials and Tests & Evaluations.)

APPENDIX F – FIELD EXERCISES
APPENDIX G – HUNTER SKILLS TRAIL
APPENDIX H – LIVE-FIRE EXERCISES
APPENDIX I – TEACHING HUNTER ETHICS

      e. Live-Fire Exercises – Set up all live-firing exercises using the principles and practices
         as established in Standards of Field & Live-Fire and/or the Instructor Course.
         Make sure you have enough instructors to adequately conduct safe shooting activities.
         The more instructors – the more shooting stations you can have – the more time
         efficient it is! Be sure all students wear eye and ear protection during all live-firing
         sessions using modern firearms and muzzleloaders.

      f. Publicity – POST courses on the ORS System (non-private courses)! Instructors
         also may contact their local newspaper and radio stations and post
         publicity/promotional banners at all local outlets for hunting licenses (point-of-sales)
         and major sporting goods retailers. Be sure to include instructor’s name, contact phone
         number or ORS URL address listed at the top of the lead instructor’s ORS course page.


      g. Registration – Registrations are handled through the ORS System (See CHAPTER III
         – Online Registration System). NOTE: Instructors may require a parent or
         guardian to accompany any minor student under the age of seventeen (17).
         Please note this on the COURSE Set Up Page in ORS. Also, make sure two (2)
         instructors, and/or assistant instructors, and/or facility staff (“two-deep
         instruction”) stay with any student who is waiting for his/her ride to show up at
         the end of a course or session.

      h. Training Aids, Dummy Firearms/Ammo & Videos – The purpose of effective
         training aids is to facilitate the student’s learning process. Training aids should be
         CBS – Colorful, Bold and Simple! The best types of training aids include NON-
                                              28
   FIRING (DUMMY) FIREARMS of every common actions design (e.g. Mossberg®
   Firearm Set) and corresponding DUMMY Ammunition (e.g. Winchester, Genco, etc.).
   Dummy ammunition needs to be clearly marked as such!


    TPWD encourages instructors to use of a coaching style and hands-on teaching
   techniques as much as possible during both classroom and field courses. TPWD
   is currently phasing out the use of videos and DVDs, but will produce more “You
   Tube-style” video segments for use in the standardized/basic hunter education curricula
   as well as in Hunting 101 seminars and workshops. Instructors may inquire about
   useful DVDs if they still have the capability and desire to show DVDs during a
   classroom course, particularly by professional educators in the schools.

i. Exam - TPWD provides a standardized exam and corresponding answer sheet as part
   of the basic supplies.

j. Attendance/Grades – As indicated in Chapter III, once the student exam is
   administered and scored, the lead instructor is responsible for marking attendance and
   grades (Minimum Passing Score – 75%) in the ORS System for each student.

k. “Prep” Hours – Preparation hours include recruiting, pre-registration, equipment
   acquisition and maintenance, equipment set-up, take-down, recordkeeping and driving
   to and from the course location from residence. Once instructors have marked
   attendance/posted grades on the ORS system, they can enter PREP hours and dates.


l. “Taught” Hours – Taught hours include one day or multiple days of instruction
   rounded to the nearest hour. Once instructors have marked attendance/posted grades
   on the ORS system, they can enter TAUGHT hours and dates.


   NOTE: Prep and Taught Hours of Volunteers/Professional Educators are used
   as IN-KIND MATCH by TPWD to qualify for federal funds that it receives
   through the Wildlife Restoration Program (Pittman-Robertson), federal excise
   tax money distributed to the State to administer hunter education program. It is
   important that the instructor accurately records dates and times and HOURS, so
   TPWD can use the value as part of its State’s Match (25%).


m. Course Payments – After completing a course and once instructor marks attendance,
   grades, prep and taught hours, he/she must “Complete Workshop/Course” and makes
   payment, either by CREDIT CARD or check, so that the students can print out their
   permanent cards immediately upon payment. (See CHAPTER III – ORS System).




                                      29
                          4. COURSE CHECKLIST
                   Following are things the instructor should consider:

   Set Course Location, Dates, Times
   Order Course Materials (Email to: Supply.Request@tpwd.texas.gov)
   Obtain Current TPWD “Outdoor Annual” (Hunting Regulations) or OA APP (phone)
   Enter Course through the ONLINE REGISTRATION SYSTEM (See Chapter III)
   If PUBLIC: Send emails; post on Social Media; further publicize at local
    businesses/stores
   If PRIVATE: Send emails to the select group of students and/or parents
   Secure Instructors/Assistants and/or Resource Professionals
   Secure and Inspect Training Aids, Supplies & Equipment (Reserve if necessary)
   Perform Site Inspection (Hazards and Precautions)
   Have Sun Screen and Insect Repellant on hand and an adequate First Aid Kit
   Check Classroom Arrangement, Tables and Audio/Visual Equipment
   Prepare Field and Live-firing Course
   Registration, Welcome & Introductions Including Agenda and Breaks, Lunches
   Refreshments & House Cleaning (Rest Rooms, Emergency Exits, Water, etc.)
   Purpose and Overview and Distribute Evaluations at Start of Course
   Conduct Ice-breaker Exercise (e.g. Pre-test and Experience Survey)
   Conduct Hands-on, Lively Course -- Ensuring Involvement by All Students
   “Provide Final Exam, Record Scores and Recognize Students (e.g. Graduate Decals)
   Instruct Students on “Where to Go From Here?” (e. g. Public Hunting, Hunting 101s)




                                        30
       TEXAS PARKS AND WILDLIFE DEPARTMENT
       HUNTER EDUCATION INSTRUCTOR MANUAL

CHAPTER II. HE STANDARDS, FORMS & MATERIALS
 A. HUNTER EDUCATION NATIONAL STANDARDS
       IHEA-USA Hunter Education Standards
       IHEA-USA Bowhunter Education Standards
       IHEA-USA Trapper Education Standards

 B. APPROVED HUNTER EDUCATION MANUALS
       Hunter Education Student Manual
       Bowhunter Education Student Manual

 C. HUNTER EDUCATION STUDENT CARDS (Also see ORS/HE Website Am I Certified?)

 D. SUPPLY REQUEST FORM (Also see ORS Dashboard or HE Instructor Resources Page.)

          Outdoor Annual (Also promote Outdoor Annual APP)
          Final Exam(s) – Hunter and Bowhunter
          Final Exam Answer Sheet – Hunter and Bowhunter
          Final Exam Answer Key(s) – Hunter and Bowhunter
          Shooting Safety Rules
          Hunter Handbook Magazine
          Hunting Regulations Quiz
          4 Cs Decal and Student Graduate Decal
          Targets (50 Ft. 22 Cal Rifle)
          Bowhunter Education Course Items
          Hunter Education Spanish Course Items
          Public Hunting Brochures
          Hunter Education Program Brochure
          Texas Youth Hunting Program Poster
          Public Hunting Poster
          Don’t Get Tagged Poster
          Course Announcement Poster
          Instructor Decal/Name Tag
          Certificates of Attendance/Appreciation

 G. SAMPLE PUBLIC SERVICE ANNOUNCEMENT

 I. SAMPLE EVALUATION FORMS: SELF, TEAM, STUDENT




                                         31
               A. IHEA-USA APPROVED (INTERNATIONAL) STANDARDS

                                  HUNTER EDUCATION
                                       Summary

I. Reasons for Hunter Education and Justification for Hunting
        A. Justification for Hunter Education
                   1. Why hunter education is important
        B. Hunter’s Role in Wildlife Conservation
                   1. Role of hunting in conservation
                   2. North American Model of Wildlife Conservation
                   3. Conservation funding - wildlife management & hunter education
        C. Key Wildlife Ecology & Management Principles
                   1. Basic factors of wildlife conservation
                   2. Biological basis for hunting

II. Safe Firearm Handling
         A. Safe Firearm Handling (mechanics)
                   1. Major causes of incidents
                   2. Basic rules of firearm safety
                   3. Parts of a firearm including safety mechanisms
                   4. Differences between rifles, shotguns and handguns
                   5. Common firearm actions
                   6. Parts of ammunition
                   7. Proper ammunition
                   8. Performance characteristics of ammunition
         B. Safe Firearm Handling
                   1. Passing firearms safely
                   2. Failure to fire
                   3. Loading and unloading firearms
                   4. Crossing obstacles
                  5. Shooting skill
                  6. Eye and ear protection
                  7. Transporting firearms
                  8. Cleaning firearms
                  9. Storing firearms




                                               32
III. Safe Firearm Field Practices
         A. Safe Firearm Field Practices
                   1. Handling firearms in hunting situations
                   2. Proper field carries
                   3. Safe zones of fire
                   4. Barrel obstructions
         B. Hunter Field Safety
                   1. Elevated Stands/Climbing Systems
                   2. Full Body Harness/Fall Arrest Systems
         C. Hunter Best Practices
                 1. Avoid alcohol and drug consumption
                 2. Outdoor preparedness
                 3. Preparing a "Hunt Plan"
                 4. Physical Conditioning


IV. Hunting Laws, Regulations and Wildlife Identification
       A. Hunting Regulations
               1. Reasons for hunting laws/regulations and who regulates/legislates
                   2. Resources for locating current hunting regulations
         B. Wildlife Identification
                   1. Wildlife identification skills for hunters


V. Personal Responsibility and Next Steps
        A. Personal Responsibility and Behavior
                1. Responsible & respectful behaviors that promote
                positive image of hunters/hunting
                2. Fair chase principles that show respect for game and others
         B. Responsibility to Wildlife
                 1. Effective shot placement/angles to ensure a quick, clean kill
                 2. Game Recovery – Tracking techniques and reading sign
                 3. Proper and legal care of game to prevent violations/meat spoilage
                 4. Proper selection of sporting arms to satisfy legal
                 requirements and ensure accuracy




                                                 33
IHEA-USA APPROVED (INTERNATIONAL) STANDARDS CONT…

                              BOWHUNTER EDUCATION
                                    Summary

I. Reasons and Justification for Bow Hunting
       A. Justification - Why Bowhunter Education is important
       B. Challenge - Bow hunting challenges
       C. Benefits - Bow hunting motivations
       D. Bowhunter’s Role in Wildlife Conservation
              a. Bow types/materials North American Model of Wildlife Conservation
              b. Conservation funding for wildlife management, habitat management and
                   Bowhunter Education

II. Basic Equipment
       B. Basic Equipment – Bows and Arrows
              a. Bow types/materials
              b. Arrow types/materials
              c. Arrow points types/uses
       C. Matching Bows and Arrows
       D. Basic Equipment Accessories
              a. Bow sights
              b. Arrow quivers
              c. Finger and arm protection and release aids

III. Safe Handling of Bow and Arrows
        A. Archery/Bow hunting incidents - major causes of archery/bow hunting incidents
        B. Safe Handling of Archery Equipment
               a. Handling of bows and arrows
               b. Proper storage and transportation of bows and arrows

IV. Tree Stand and Outdoor Safety
       A. Tree Stand Safety
              a. Elevated stands
              b. Full-body harness/fall arrest systems
              c. Climbing systems - ladders and steps
              d. Ascending and descending systems - lines and belts
              e. Proper use of haul lines
       E. Outdoor Safety & Preparedness
               a. Survival kit
               b. STOP
               c. Preparing a hunt plan
               d. Physical conditioning
               e. Hypothermia and heat exhaustion




                                              34
V. Bow Hunting Regulations and Basic Responsibilities
      A. Bow Hunting Regulations
             a. Why bow hunting laws & regulations are necessary
             b. Regulation resources
      B. Landowner Considerations
      C. Basic Responsibilities

VI. Taking a Good Shot
       A. Proper Equipment
              a. Matching bow to personal capabilities
              b. Matching bow to game hunted
              c. Draw weight and draw length
       B. Taking a Good Shot
              a. Distance Estimation
              b. Shot angles
              c. Shot placement/vital zones
       C. Bow Hunting Preparation and Techniques
              a. Bow hunting techniques
              b. Clothing
              c. Field accessories and considerations

VII. Game Recovery and Care
       A. Game Recovery Skills – Tracking techniques and reading signs
       B. Care of Game – Proper and legal care of game helps to preventing meat spoilage




                                              35
         APPROVED HUNTER EDUCATION MANUALS

 HUNTER EDUCATION              BOWHUNTER EDUCATION




CROSSBOW EDUCATION           SPANISH HUNTER EDUCATION




                        36
SUPPLY REQUEST FORM




      37
         OUTDOOR ANNUAL, EXAM, INSTRUCTOR & STUDENT MATERIALS




Outdoor Annual or OA App Card        Hunter Education Final Exam            Safety Brochure   Hunter Ed Decals/Inst Badge




Hunter Education Brochure   Bowhunter Education Pocket Guide       Hunting 101 Brochure       Bowhunter Patches/ID Badge




                                                           38
 Spanish Materials: Instructors who offer                      Live-fire Materials: Instructors can request hand-
 “Spanish Speaking” courses can order the manual,              delivered ammunition at 10 rounds of .22 caliber or
 exam, public hunting and other materials converted            12/20 gauge shot shells per student and targets
 to Spanish to assist students in the learning process.        (standard or specialty) from Staff Specialists or HQ.




Certificate of Appreciation: Instructors are                    Loaner Supplies & Equipment: Instructors can
encouraged to request and present a “Certificate of             request loaner dummy firearms and ammunition,
Appreciation” to those who support the Hunter                   skills trail supplies and/or wildlife furs/skulls from
Education Program with their donations and time.                hand delivered by Specialists or pickup at HQ.




                                                          39
            SAMPLE PUBLIC SERVICE ANNOUNCEMENT

For Immediate Release
                HUNTER EDUCATION COURSE SCHEDULED!
Your town…. A course in hunter education has been scheduled for _________________________
                                                                          (Dates)
Beginning at ________________ in ___________________, according to___________________,
                 (a.m. /p.m.)              (City)
Hunter Education Instructor.

According to Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, if you were born on or after September 2, 1971,
and you are
• Under 9 years of age, you must be accompanied*.
• age 9 through 16, you must successfully complete a hunter education course, or you must be
accompanied*.
• age 17 and over, you must successfully complete a hunter education course; or purchase a
“Hunter Education Deferral,” and you must be accompanied*.

Hunter Education Deferral (cost: $10) – Allows a person 17 years of age or older who has not
completed a hunter education program to defer certification for up to one year. A deferral may only
be obtained once and is only valid until the end of the current license year. A person who has been
convicted or has received deferred adjudication for violation of the mandatory hunter education
requirement is prohibited from applying for a deferral.
*Accompanied means: By a person who is at least 17, who is licensed to hunt in Texas, who has
passed hunter education or is exempt (born before Sept. 2, 1971), and who is within normal voice
control. Proof of certification or deferral is required to be on your person while hunting.
Note: Certification is not required to purchase a hunting license.

However, any individual may take the course on a voluntary basis and is encouraged to attend
regardless of requirements, according to _________________________________________.
                                                                (Name)
“The course is open to adults and youngsters and will include instruction in modern firearms and
primitive sporting arms handling and safety; outdoor responsibility and ethics; laws and regulations;
wildlife conservation and management; hunting traditions; field care of game; and wilderness first aid
and survival,” ____________________________________ added.
                               (Name)

The minimum age for certification is 9 years and cost is $15. Students 9 years of age or older
successfully completing the course will be issued a “Temporary Student Card” at the end of the
course. Students will then receive an original “Hunter Education Certificate” from Texas Parks and
Wildlife after processing the paperwork. Those less than 9 years of age will receive a “Certificate of
Attendance,” but must take the course again after turning 9 for proper certification. Since 1972,
more than 850,000 Texans have already completed the hunter education course, which is mandatory
in 50 states and 10 Canadian provinces.

For more information, contact __________________________ at _________________________
                                       (Name)                             (Phone)
OR Texas Parks and Wildlife Department at 1-800-792-1112, (512) 389-4999 or our website at
www.tpwd.state.tx.us/edu/hunter
                                                 40
                TEXAS PARKS AND WILDLIFE DEPARTMENT
                         HUNTER EDUCATION
                    INSTRUCTOR SELF-EVALUATION
Carefully review the evaluations your students completed for the course. How does your rating of yourself
compare with those of your students? Did you agree on what subjects were most useful? Least useful? Be
as specific as you can with your evaluation.

1.     How well did this class perform on the Final Exam?

2.     How did the group react to demonstrations and student participation exercises?

3.     Did I “target” this class well in areas of:
       Interest? ________________________________________________________________
       Level of skill and experience? ________________________________________________

4.     What specific topics should be:
       Omitted? _______________________________________________________________
       Added? _________________________________________________________________
       Emphasized more? ________________________________________________________
       Emphasized less? _________________________________________________________

5.     Which lessons require:
       More time? ______________________________________________________________
       Less time? _______________________________________________________________

6.     What changes, if any, should be made in the sequence of the lessons?



7.     What activity/subject seemed to motivate the students the most?



8.     What changes should be made in:
       materials_________________________________________________________________
       Classroom set-up__________________________________________________________
       Teaching methods_________________________________________________________
       Evaluation methods________________________________________________________

9.     I should use (more, less, about the same) different teaching methods/aids in the next class.

10.    I should spend (more, less, about the same) time organizing my course.

11.    I should spend (more, less, about the same) time preparing and studying the lesson objectives and
       planning their presentation.

12.    I should spend (more, about the same) time studying the subject matter and technical
        information.




                                                     41
                 TEXAS PARKS AND WILDLIFE DEPARTMENT
                          HUNTER EDUCATION

                                 TEAM MEMBER EVALUATION

Used by instructors who are team teaching, to evaluate each other (Please do NOT send to Austin.)

Please circle the number which indicates your rating for each statement. Remember that 1 is the poorest
rating; 3 is average; and 5 is the best rating.

                                                              Never       Usually       Always
Main points (objectives) were clear;
Essential ideas were properly emphasized.                     1       2     3       4      5

Instructor was knowledgeable about the subject;
Information was up-to-date.                                   1       2     3       4      5

Instructor stated and met course objectives;
Instructor related subject well.                              1       2     3       4      5

Instructor kept the information well sequenced;
Ideas were in logical order.                                  1       2     3       4      5

Instructor used varying methods & techniques;
Instructor used training aids and hands-on activities.        1       2     3       4      5

Students appeared to be interested;
Students were attentive to the instructor.                    1       2     3       4      5

Students were given a chance to ask questions;
Students participated in activities.                          1       2     3       4      5

Instructor was well prepared with needed materials;
Class was organized and equipment in good shape.              1       2     3       4      5

Instructor started and finished on scheduled time.            1       2     3       4      5

Instructor made good use of the time;
Instructor avoided non-essential stories/topics.              1       2     3       4      5

Comments: Strong points, areas that need attention, etc.

____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________



                     TEXAS PARKS AND WILDLIFE DEPARTMENT

                                                         42
                                 HUNTER EDUCATION

                        STUDENT COURSE EVALUATION

STUDENT:    Please help us make this course better by completing the following evaluation.
            Please CIRCLE the number which indicates your rating for each question.
            Remember that 1 is the poorest rating; 3 is Average; and 5 is the best rating.
            Thank you.

                                               INSTRUCTOR _________________________________

                                                COURSE DATES_______________________________


   INSTRUCTOR AND LEARNING                                 NEVER                        ALWAYS


   1.   Instructor was knowledgeable and made good          1         2         3        4       5
        use of time.

   2.   Instructor was prompt, prepared and                 1         2         3        4       5
        organized.

   3.   Instructor taught course in an interesting,         1         2         3        4       5
        informative manner.

   4.   I had many chances to participate or ask            1         2         3        4       5
        questions.
                                                            1         2         3        4       5
   5.   Student material was useful and will be saved.
                                                            1         2         3        4       5
   6.   Videos helped me understand better.
                                                            1         2         3        4       5
   7.   Training aids helped me understand better.

   7.   Tests provided a fair evaluation of what was        1         2         3        4       5
        learned.
                                                            1         2         3        4       5
   8.   Facilities were adequate and comfortable.




                                                      43
GENERAL INFORMATION

1.      Do you feel you learned information that will help you be a safe and responsible hunter?
                                      YES                             NO


2.      Have you attempted to enroll in or have you attended another Hunter Education course?
                                      YES                           NO


3.      Would you recommend this course to your friends or relatives?
                                           YES                                  NO


4.      Was the course too long? ________               - too short? _________


5.      What did you enjoy MOST about this course? _________________________________
        _____________________________________________________________________
        _____________________________________________________________________


6.      What did you enjoy LEAST about the course? _________________________________
        _____________________________________________________________________
        _____________________________________________________________________


7.      Why did you attend this course? ____________________________________________
        _____________________________________________________________________


8.      Any suggestions or comments? ____________________________________________
        _____________________________________________________________________
        _____________________________________________________________________
        _____________________________________________________________________


Please return this Evaluation to the Instructor(s); do not send it to Austin.

Texas Parks and Wildlife Department (TPWD) will send you a permanent Certification card after they
receive your signed and instructor-approved Student Registration and Instructor Course Final Report. This
may take several weeks.
  Thank you and please remember the principles of hunter safety, preparation, responsibility, and
                                                courtesy.




                                                       44
                TEXAS PARKS AND WILDLIFE DEPARTMENT
                         HUNTER EDUCATION

                                   FIELD ACTIVITIES
                                 RELEASE OF LIABILITY




I/We_________________________________and/or__________________________________                            ,
parent/s, and/or legal guardian/s of _________________________________ hereby acknowledge that the
Texas Parks and Wildlife Department Hunter Education Course Field Activities have inherent risks and
dangers that may result in serious bodily injury or even death and nevertheless by our/my signature below
give ____________________________ permission to participate in the activities and by our/my signature
below, release, indemnify and hold harmless Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, its agents, officers and
employees, against damages and costs of defense including attorney's fees and from any judgment, claim or
any action, directly or indirectly arising from ________________________________ participation in the
Texas Hunter Education Program.

Printed Name: __________________________________________________________________

Signed: _______________________________________             Date: _________________________

Printed Name: __________________________________________________________________

Signed: _______________________________________             Date: _________________________




                                                   45
         TEXAS PARKS AND WILDLIFE DEPARTMENT
         HUNTER EDUCATION INSTRUCTOR MANUAL


CHAPTER III. ONLINE REGISTRATION SYSTEM (ORS)
                          https://tpwd.elementlms.com/
E.   LOGIN

B.   DASHBOARD

C.   ADD COURSE LOCATION

D.   ADD NEW COURSE

E.   PUBLIC/PRIVATE LINKS

F.   ROSTER, ATTENDANCE AND GRADES

G.   PREP & TAUGHT TIME

H.   COMPLETE WORKSHOP

I.   FOLLOWING COURSE

J.   REPORTS AND ROSTERS FROM PREVIOUS COURSES

K.   RECEIPTS

L.   QUESTIONS, ASSISTANCE AND CONTACTS




                                       46
                                         Online Registration System Guide

   To log into your profile, visit:   https://tpwd.elementlms.com/




           In the upper right, click “Login To Account”




A. LOGIN
   USERNAME: Email Address
   PASSWORD: Your password is your initials followed by your birthdate (8-digit format). If John Doe’s
   birthdate is January 1, 1960 (01-01-1960): JD01011960.
   LOST PASSWORD: Enter your login and request new password. The system will email you a login link.

B. DASHBOARD
   Once logged in, you will see your “DASHBOARD”
   ***PLEASE CONSULT “QUICK START GUIDES” at Instructor Dashboard for more completed instructions***;
   Also note that SUPPLY ORDER FORMS and INSTRUCTOR CERTIFICATION CARDS are also
   accessible on your dashboard, any time you need them.




                                                          47
  C. ADD COURSE LOCATION
     If you are creating a class for the first time, click on “Courses,” then “Add Course Location” You must
     create a location prior to creating a class. After creating the location, make sure you “Save Draft,” then
     “Publish” the course location. (You are adding a new location to YOUR address book of locations)




 If you type in a street address, Google Maps will automatically populate the link and map at your scheduled
 course pages, once you “PUBLISH” the new location.
 Note: PO Boxes or other information typed into the address lines will nullify map links, and may nullify
 course listings. Please just enter Address Line 1, City and Zip Code and then hit “PUBLISH”

D. ADD NEW COURSE:

  1. Click “Add New Course” from the menu on the left side. Click on the “Course Title” drop down box
     and select a class type.
  2. Depending on what you as an instructor are certified to teach, will determine what options you will have
     to teach.
  3. For example – if you are an Area Chief Instructor you will have more options than if you are not an Area
     Chief Instructor.
  4. If you are teaching the one-day “Basic” course, click on the drop-down arrow to select “Hunter
     Education Classroom Course”

                                                       48
5. If your course is a Private class, check the “Private Course” box
a. Most Professional Educators teaching high school agriculture science courses, and those teaching in schools
   using the Outdoor Adventures curriculum, will mark “PRIVATE” so that only the students they send a link
   to will be able to register for the course.
b. Volunteer and TPWD employees may also be working with a known/private group and check the box, but
   most volunteers will want everyone from the PUBLIC to see the listing online and opt to not check the
   private course box on the right of the screen.
6. Next, in the big white box, enter specifics about your class such as range fees, dress information, contact
   information, whether you allow snacks or lunch in class, etc.
7. Click “SAVE DRAFT” from the menu box on the right of the page. The page will ‘refresh’ and open
   additional boxes for you to complete.
8. Enter “TOTAL SEATS,” “EVENT DATE,” and “EVENT TIMES” (start/end times). Pay attention to the
   calendar. It is the international format – it starts with Monday.
a. Select the “ADD ANOTHER DATE” box if your class will be held over multiple days (i.e. for one-day
   classes, do not hit this box.)
b. For Professional Educators, you should list the start date and end date – so at least two class dates will be
   listed. OR, you can simply put in the end date.
c. Note that you cannot enter any class date that represents a PAST or the CURRENT date. Only future dates
   may be listed when setting up new courses.




                                                           49
     9. Click the “LIVE EVENT LOCATION” box. This provides you all the course locations you have
        entered. If NO locations appear, you have not “PUBLISHED” your course location when you ADD
        COURSE LOCATION.
     10. If you are TEAM TEACHING, the additional instructors can be entered at the bottom of this page.
        Please remember, the name is the instructor’s legal name, i.e. James, not Jim. If you invite a Game
        Warden to present at your class, please remember to give them credit for the class. All “active” and
        certified instructors appear in this area. If the team instructor(s) name(s) does/do not appear, use
        Instructor # or email.
     11. * Everyone gets equal credit for team-teaching.
     12. When you compete all the fields, click “SAVE DRAFT.”
     13. After you have checked it one last time, click “PUBLISH”, a blue button at right



    PUBLIC/PRIVATE LINKS

       STUDENT REGISTRATION
1. Students click on the REGISTER NOW button and complete their individual information (name, address,
   date of birth, password) to set up their accounts and then receive a confirmation order notifying them that
   $15 is due in payment to the instructor upon arrival at the course.




                                                           50
 E. ROSTER, ATTENDANCE AND GRADES

    Your students will NOT get certified unless they ALL APPEAR on your roster.
1. Click “Attendance and Test Scores” from the menu. Select “ATTENDANCE” from the drop-down menu
2. Click on the drop-down arrow to choose the “Course” you are completing
3. Click on the drop-down arrow to “Select Lesson”
4. Click “Show”




5. A list of all registered students will appear on this page
6. Click on the box to the left of the number by your student’s name, to mark them as attended. If everyone on
    your roster attended, you can use the “Bulk Actions” drop down at the top of the page to “Select All”
    students who were present.
7. Hit “Apply” next to “Bulk Actions” to save
8. If anyone was absent, click on the box to the left of the number of those students, to mark them as absent,
    use the “Bulk Actions” drop down at the top of the page to “Select All” students who were absent.
9. Hit “Apply” next to “Bulk Actions” to save
10. If any students did not register, please make sure they register before leaving the class – if possible.
11. If a student cannot register DURING your class (no smart phone, computer, or cell signal) – you can send
    them the link to your class, via email or text, and they can register when they get home.

    NOTE: YOU ONLY HAVE THREE (3) DAYS TO MAKE ANY CHANGES TO YOUR CLASS –
    AFTER 3 DAYS YOUR CLASS WILL ‘LOCK’ AND NOT ALLOW YOU TO MAKE ANY
    FURTHER CHANGES.
12. Once you mark attended/absent’, a GRADE box will appear for each attending student.
13. Enter test score in the grade box.
14. The system will automatically mark them as PASSED if they score a 75 or higher.
    The system will automatically mark them as FAILED if they score a 74 or lower.




                                                             51
F. PREP & TAUGHT TIME

  This is an IMPORTANT step as the actual prep and taught hours you mark down are used as part of
  the STATE’s MATCH to federal dollars it is reimbursed from the Wildlife Restoration Hunter Education
  Account (USFWS Project W104S). Be sure to note each date of actual PREP and TAUGHT hours – this is
  the official log for when you were involved in preparing for and teaching hunter education.
  1. Complete the “SKILLS” and “LIVE FIRE” boxes by checking YES or NO. Skills reflect use of the
     actual hands-on Skills Trail exercises in Classroom and/or Field Courses
  2. Enter “PREP” dates and hours for each date listed.
  3. Enter “TAUGHT” dates and hours for each date listed.




H. COMPLETE WORKSHOP
   1. Go to “BULK ACTIONS” at the top of the page and drop down to select “COMPLETE
       WORKSHOP”




                                                     52
 2. The page will refresh and create a purchase order for you.
 3. Hit “PROCEED TO CHECKOUT” and enter your CREDIT CARD information to pay for and finalize
     the class.
     NOTE: This system will NOT save credit/debit cards on file


I.   FOLLOWING COURSE

    Once Instructor “Completes Workshop” and pays for students on his/her roster, the system will
     automatically generate an email to all students letting them know they can now print their Hunter
     Education certifications, or save their certifications as a Screenshot or PDF on their Smartphone as
     proof of certification when in the field.

    Students may print their cards at any time by accessing TPWD web site and linking to:
     https://tpwd.elementlms.com/




     Instructors need to inform students that certification cards are NO LONGER mailed by TPWD – all are
     available online unless a special request is filed with TPWD (e.g. no computers, special waiver for disability,
     instructor cards)
                                                             53
J. REPORTS AND ROSTERS FOR PREVIOUS COURSES
    1. Click on “Reports”
    2. You can click on the drop-down Report to select “Courses Completed” or “Courses Not
        Completed” or “Final Student Rosters”
    3. At the top of the page you will see “CSV” button. You can HIT this and an EXCEL spreadsheet
        will be accessible for you to use to print out prior to or after your courses and to better organize the
        date for use as a sign-up sheet during class, or permanent backup record for storage on your own
        computer.




K. RECEIPTS

From your main Dashboard page, click on “Education Registration System” and then on “VISIT SITE” and
“MY ACCOUNT.” This will show all your transactions of paid/unpaid receipts for your classes.




                                                       54
K. QUESTIONS, ASSISTANCE & CONTACTS

     Statewide (Austin) HE Coordinator Steve Hall; HE Admin Asst. Eddie Kleppinger
         Steve.Hall@tpwd.texas.gov                    Office: 512-389-8140; Cell: 512-550-7330
         Eddie.kleppinger@tpwd.texas.gov              Office: 512-389-8142
     North TX (DFW) Monica Bickerstaff
         Monica.Bickerstaff@tpwd.texas.gov            Office/Cell: 469-601-8349
     South TX (Corpus Christi) Brock Minton
         Brock.Minton@tpwd.texas.gov           Office: 361-825-3249; Cell: 361-944-3617
     Southeast TX (Houston) Heidi Rao
         Heidi.Rao@tpwd.texas.gov                     Office/Cell: 713-829-1377
     West TX (Abilene): Randy Spradlin
      Randy.Spradlin@tpwd.texas.gov            Office/Cell: 512-923-3509
     Central TX (College Station) Morgan Harbison
         Morgan.Harbison@tpwd.texas.gov               Office/Cell: 512-413-0194




                                             55
       TEXAS PARKS AND WILDLIFE DEPARTMENT
       HUNTER EDUCATION INSTRUCTOR MANUAL

CHAPTER IV.        APPENDICES

                             Table of Contents
A. Appendix A – Texas Hunter Education Statute

B.Appendix B – Texas Administrative Code & Regulations

C.Appendix C – Firearm Authorization Letter (SAMPLE)

D. Appendix D – Course Goals & “Top Ten” Issues

E. Appendix E – Classroom Course Exercises

F. Appendix F – Field Course Exercises

G. Appendix G – Hunter Skills Trail

H. Appendix H – Live-fire Exercises

I. Appendix I – Teaching Hunter Ethics




                                      56
                                                          Appendix A.
           Texas Hunter Education Statute (Parks & Wildlife Code Section 62.014)
                                     Sec. 62.014. HUNTER EDUCATION PROGRAM.

(a) In this section:
          (1) "Firearm" means any device designed, made, or adapted to expel a projectile through a barrel by using the energy
          generated by an explosion or burning substance or any device readily convertible to that use.
          (2) "Archery equipment" means a long bow, recurved bow, or compound bow.
(b) The department may establish and administer a statewide hunter education program. The program must include but is not
limited to instruction concerning:
(1) The safe handling and use of firearms, archery equipment, and crossbows;
(2) Wildlife conservation and management;
(3) Hunting laws and applicable rules and regulations; and
(4) Hunting safety and ethics, including landowners' rights.
(c) The department shall issue a certificate to a person who has successfully completed a hunter education course. The
department shall prescribe the form of the certificate.
(d) If funds are available for its implementation the commission may establish a mandatory hunter education program and may
require a person to have successfully completed a training course before the person may hunt with firearms, archery equipment as
defined in Subsection (a) of this section, or crossbows in Texas. If the certificate is so required, the person must possess the
certificate or other evidence of completion of the program while hunting with firearms, archery equipment as defined in
Subsection (a) of this section, or crossbows. The commission may provide that residents or nonresidents who have successfully
completed the same or a comparable hunter education course and possess a certificate or other evidence of completion have
satisfied the requirements imposed under this subsection. The commission may establish a minimum age for participation in the
program. Those persons who cannot participate in the hunter education program because they do not meet the minimum age or
other requirements established by the commission can only hunt with firearms, archery equipment as defined in Subsection (a) of
this section, or crossbows in Texas if they are accompanied by a person who is 17 years of age or older and licensed to hunt in
Texas. Additionally, a person under 17 years of age hunting with a person licensed to hunt in Texas who is 17 years of age or older
is not required to have certification under this Act.
The commission may implement the program by age group. Persons who are 17 years of age or older on September 1, 1988, or on
the date on which a mandatory hunter education course is implemented, whichever is later, are exempt from the requirements
imposed under this subsection.
The department is responsible for offering mandatory hunter education courses that are accessible to those persons required to
take this course. To this end, the department shall provide hunter education opportunities in each county of the state when a
substantial number of residents request a class or at least once a year.
(e) The commission may maximize the utilization of volunteer instructors to minimize the costs of the course and is authorized to
charge a fee not to exceed $15 to defray administrative costs. Fees collected under this subsection, less any instructor expenses
approved by the department, shall be deposited to the credit of the game, fish, and water safety account. The commission by rule


                                                                  57
may establish a procedure to allow a volunteer instructor to retain an amount from the fees collected by the instructor under this
subsection to cover the instructor's actual and necessary out-of-pocket expenses.
(f) The department shall determine qualifications for instructors in the hunter education program and shall recruit, train, and
certify instructors for the program.
(g) The department may cooperate with educational institutions, local governments, individuals, or organizations interested in
hunter education in administering this section. The department may accept gifts, grants, and donations to be used in administering
this section.
(h) The commission shall adopt rules to implement the hunter education program.
(i) The commission may establish an incentive program to encourage citizens to participate in the program as instructors.
(j) A person who violates any provision of this section or any proclamation or regulation of the commission issued under the
authority of this section commits an offense.
(k) If the commission requires a person to possess a certificate issued under this section and if the person is charged with a Class
C Parks and Wildlife Code misdemeanor for failing to possess the required certificate, the person may present to the court not later
than the 10th day after the date of the alleged offense an oral request or written motion to take a hunter safety training course.
(l) If a person requests a hunter safety training course as provided by Subsection (d) of this section, the court shall defer
proceedings and allow the person 90 days to present written evidence that, after being charged with failure to possess the
certificate, the person has successfully completed a hunter safety training course approved by the department. If a person
successfully completes the course and the evidence presented is accepted by the court, the court shall dismiss the charge.
(m) It is a defense to prosecution under this section for failure to possess a certificate that the person charged produces in court a
certificate issued to that person that was valid on the date of the alleged offense.
(n) The following persons are exempt from any requirement to complete a hunter education course under this section:
(1) an honorably discharged veteran of the United States armed forces or a person who is on active duty as a member of the
United States armed forces;
(2) a person who is on active duty or has previously served as a member of the Texas Army National Guard, the Texas Air
National Guard, or the Texas State Guard; or
(3) a person who is serving or has previously served as a peace officer described by Subdivision (1), (2), (3), or (4), Article 2.12,
Code of Criminal Procedure.




                                                                   58
                                                         Appendix B.
                     Texas Hunter Education Rules (Texas Administrative Code)
         Title 31, Part 2, Chapter 51 - Executive, Subchapter D - Education
        RULE §51.80                               Hunter Education Course and Instructors
(a) Hunter Education Course.
  (1) The Hunter Education Course must consist of instruction on the following subjects:
   (A) the safe handling and use of firearms and archery equipment;
   (B) wildlife conservation and management;
   (C) hunting laws and regulations of this state; and
   (D) hunting safety and ethics, including landowners' rights.
  (2) Subject to the restrictions and exceptions contained in this section, the Hunter Education Course required by this
section may be delivered via:
   (A) classroom instruction not to exceed six hours;
   (B) a combination of online instruction and skills exercise (skills exercise of not less than four nor more than five
hours in duration); or
   (C) online instruction only, for persons 17 years of age or older.
  (3) The Hunter Education Course required by this section may be provided by:
   (A) certified volunteer instructors who have successfully completed the department's game warden interview,
background investigation, and an instructor training course; or
   (B) online instruction providers approved by the department.
  (4) The department may decertify instructors for:
   (A) violation of provisions of the Parks and Wildlife Code or regulations adopted pursuant to the Code;
   (B) falsification of records or documents; or
   (C) action that is detrimental to the objective of the program.
  (5) The department shall provide hunter education opportunities in each county of the state when a substantial number
of residents request a class or at least once a year.
  (6) The department shall issue a certificate to persons who successfully complete the course. A duplicate certificate may
be issued upon request to the department's hunter education section or in person to a law enforcement field office or
department-approved instruction provider.
  (7) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit a person from providing or receiving hunter education
instruction in addition to that required by this section.
(b) Hunter Education Requirements.
  (1) A person whose date of birth is after September 1, 1971, must successfully complete a Hunter Education Course
described in subsection (a) of this section before the person may hunt with firearms or archery equipment in Texas.
  (2) A Texas Voluntary Hunter Safety Course successfully completed prior to June 1, 1989, satisfies the mandatory
hunter education requirements of this section.
  (3) A person must be at least nine years of age to be certified.
  (4) A Hunter Education Course is successfully completed when the student:
   (A) has fulfilled the instructional requirements of subsection (a)(1) of this section;
   (B) is evaluated by the instructor or department-approved online instruction provider as acceptable in attitude,
knowledge, and skill; and
   (C) has taken an examination prescribed by the department and scored a minimum of 75 percent.
  (5) The online-only Hunter Education Course is restricted to persons 17 years of age and older.
  (6) A person who is required to be certified must possess evidence of certification while hunting in Texas.
  (7) Any individual is encouraged to take the course on a voluntary basis.
  (8) A person who is unable to pass the examination as the result of an existing medical condition may, upon
authorization from the department, be granted certification.
  (9) A person is exempt from live-firing requirements of the Hunter Education Course delivered via classroom
instruction or a combination of online instruction and skills exercise if the person is:
   (A) an honorably discharged veteran of the United States armed forces; or
   (B) on active duty as a member of the United States armed forces, the Texas Army National Guard, the Texas Air
National Guard, or the Texas State Guard.
(c) Other Non-certified Persons.
  (1) Persons under 17 years of age may hunt without certification if accompanied by a person 17 years of age or older
who is licensed to hunt in Texas in accordance with the Parks and Wildlife Code and is in compliance with applicable
hunter education requirements.
                                                                   59
  (2) A person 17 years of age or older who is required to complete hunter education may hunt without certification if
 that person is:
    (A) in possession of a valid hunting license indicating that the person has selected the "Deferred Hunter Education
 Option" offered by the department; and
    (B) is accompanied by a person 17 years of age or older who is licensed to hunt in Texas in accordance with the Parks
 and Wildlife Code and is in compliance with applicable hunter education requirements.
  (3) For the purposes of this section, an uncertified person is considered as being accompanied if that person is within
 normal voice distance.
  (4) A deferred hunter education option expires at the end of the license year for which it was purchased.
  (5) No person may select the deferred hunter education option more than once.
  (6) A person who has been convicted of or received deferred adjudication for not having completed a mandatory hunter
 education course is prohibited from obtaining a deferred hunter education option.
Source Note: The provisions of this §51.80 adopted to be effective January 3, 2005, 29 TexReg 12225; amended to be
effective May 26, 2008, 33 TexReg 4182; amended to be effective February 2, 2009, 34 TexReg 665; amended to be
effective October 30, 2011, 36 TexReg 7333; amended to be effective September 19, 2013, 38 TexReg 6218

Chapter 53 - Finance, Subchapter A – Fees, Division 3
      RULE §53.50                 Training and Certification Fees
(b) Hunter education fees.
 (1) The registration fee for a hunter education course delivered by an approved volunteer instructor is $15, of which $10
may be directly retained by a volunteer instructor.
 (2) The fee for a hunter education course delivered by an approved online instruction provider shall be established by the
online instruction provider, not to exceed an amount established by the Executive Director.
 (3) The fee for a deferred hunter education option is $10.

Source Note: The provisions of this §53.50 adopted to be effective July 7, 2004, 29 TexReg 6309; amended to be effective
April 6, 2006, 31 TexReg 2861; amended to be effective January 4, 2012, 36 TexReg 9334; amended to be effective January
2, 2013, 37 TexReg 10229; amended to be effective September 19, 2013, 38 TexReg 6222




                                                                   60
                                              Appendix C.
                                     Firearm Authorization Letter
To Whom It May Concern:

I, __________________________________________, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department
                      (Name/s)                                                          certified
Hunter Education Instructor/s, ID # ____________ request permission to bring the firearms listed below
onto the premises of the following facility/address:

___________________________________________________________________________

___________________________________________________________________________

Course DATES/TIMES: ______________________________________________________

Hunter Education is a State-mandated program as authorized in Section 62.014 of the Parks & Wildlife
Code. Training aids may include simulated/actual props, rifles, shotguns, handguns, air guns and/or archery
equipment. NOTE: No live ammunition will be made available at the facility, unless the facility
authorizes use for actual live-fire exercises (e.g. safe range, private ranch).

Firearms - Description                                                        Serial #
__________________________________________________________ ______________
__________________________________________________________ ______________
__________________________________________________________ ______________
__________________________________________________________ ______________
__________________________________________________________ ______________
__________________________________________________________ ______________
__________________________________________________________ ______________
__________________________________________________________ ______________
Other Sporting Arms - Description
___________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________
I hereby grant permission for the use of listed training aids and fully agree to allow hunter education course
instruction to be conducted at and on the above listed location and date (s).

Facility - Authorizing Individual/Title:

Printed Name: _________________________________                Title: ______________________

Signed: _______________________________________                Date: ______________________

Hunter Education Instructor:

Printed Name: __________________________________               Date: ______________________

Signed: ________________________________________


                                                      61
                                                            Appendix D.

                                            Course Goals and “Top Ten” Lists

                                     Five (5) Basic GOALS for Hunter Education
         1. Practice good FIREAM, HUNTING & OUTDOOR SAFETY habits
         2. Comply with all Wildlife and Game LAWS & REGULATIONS
         3. Take a GOOD SHOT to reduce wounding loss
         4. Take CARE OF GAME from field to table
         5. Act ETHICALLY (e.g. Fair Chase, Good Public Image)


     GOAL 1. BE SAFE! - TOP TEN Most Common Hunting Incident Causes
                                               National Hunting Incident Data Analysis (2005-2012

         1.  FALLS FROM ELEVATED STANDS - Falls from Elevated Stands/Failure to Use Haul Line/Safety Harness
             (n=589)
         2. FAILURE TO POINT MUZZLE IN SAFE DIRECTION - Careless Handling of Firearms/Failure to Control
             Muzzle (n=549)
         3. FAILURE TO OBSERVE SAFE ZONE-OF-FIRE - Shooter Swinging on Game Outside of a Safe Zone of Fire
             (n=513)
         4. VICTIM BEYOND TARGET - Victim Out of Sight of Shooter/Failure to Check Background (n=465)
         5. VICTIM MISTAKEN FOR GAME - Failure to Properly Identify Target (n=391)
         6. STUMBLING/DROPPING FIREARM - A - Shooter Stumbled and Fell/Dropped Firearm (n=169)
         7. TRIGGER CAUGHT ON OBJECT - Trigger Caught on Object (n=165)
         8. VICTIM IN FRONT OF TARGET - Victim in Line of Fire (n=146)
         9. LOADING/UNLOADING FIREARM IMPROPERLY - Improper Loading/Unloading of Firearm (n=139)
         10. LOADED FIRARM IN OR AROUND VEHICLE - Removing/Placing Firearm in Vehicle/Discharge in Vehicle
             (n=125)

                                        Teaching/Hands-on Strategies for Hunting Incident Causes

         1.   FALLS FROM ELEVATED STANDS – Erect a tree stand about 3-5 feet from ground, in an appropriate, sturdy tree
              and cover the correct way to ascend, sit/stand and descend all from a teaching level that is both instructional and liability
              reasons. Have and test the proper gear -- a quality stand, good climbing system, stand placement system and four-point
              fall restraint harness -- for use in a classroom/field course (Reference: NBEF/Treestand Manufacturer’s Association and
              related industry materials).

         2.   FAILURE TO POINT MUZZLE IN SAFE DIRECTION 9. LOADING/UNLOADING FIREARM
              IMPROPERLY and 10. LOADED FIRARM IN OR AROUND VEHICLE (ALL CARELESS HANDLING) -
              Using Mossberg® or other inert training firearms, place into vehicle (some in the correct position and others outside of a
              case and pointing in different directions). Ask students as a team to retrieve firearms from vehicle in a safe manner, walk
              to the “hunting area” nearby and selecting and loading the proper “dummy” ammunition into the firearms that they are
              handling. Ensure safe muzzle control at all times during the exercise –evaluate and correct wrong behaviors (you may use
              other students to evaluate actions as long as you put them in the same or related scenarios as well). Watch for good
              communication between team members, not pulling firearms out from the muzzle end, muzzle control, opening of closed
              actions, carries around others, etc. Review proper transportation and storage (SAFE) techniques, proper passing of
              firearms between team members and proper loading/unloading procedures using the various action types and dummy
              ammunition.
3.   FAILURE TO OBSERVE SAFE ZONE-OF-FIRE – Set up dove/quail/pheasant/grouse “Safe Zones of Fire” using cones
     and blaze orange tapes/lines at several of the hunter positions and several without. Line students up at the correct positions and

                                                                      62
     emphasize safe zones, constant communication, hunter orange, typical and erratic animal movements (using Frisbees© thrown by
     volunteers to simulate moving birds in front of line of students), non-target species (e.g. hen pheasants, meadowlarks –using off-
     colored Frisbees©) and distances to animals using stakes and decoys (e.g. dove) at various distances in front of line of hunters.
     Evaluate safe or unsafe swings within the safe zones of fire. Cover situations from waterfowl blinds as to what constitutes safe
     zones of fire in tight quarters.

4.   VICTIM BEYOND OR 8. IN FRONT OF TARGET - Use a camouflaged mannequin or human volunteer to set up behind a
     game target (e.g. gobbler, deer) to emphasize how camo blends in behind game even at close ranges. Have students identify
     whether they would take the shot before revealing camouflaged ‘hunter’ behind game target. Use blaze orange mannequin at a far
     off distance slightly obscured to emphasize use of blaze/hunter orange as a way of being seen beyond target. Place decoys (e.g.
     deer, turkey, hog) at top of hill to emphasize not shooting at game where the bullet travels far beyond and out of sight of shooter.
     Use some decoys in front of earthen backgrounds to show good shot situations, too. Emphasize to be aware of surroundings so
     as not to walk in front of another hunter’s muzzle while hunting or around vehicles, etc. Cover situations from waterfowl blinds so
     as not to set up or stand in front of another hunter’s firearm.

5.   VICTIM MISTAKEN FOR GAME – Stress the use of binoculars to clearly identify targets prior to raising the sporting arm to
     the target. Stress the use of appropriate (e.g. blaze orange) versus inappropriate clothing (e.g. browns for deer; red/white/blue for
     turkeys; black for turkey and hogs) that might resemble game animals. Test students on obscure decoys and/or mannequins in the
     brush using their loaner binoculars.

6.   STUMBLING/DROPPING FIREARM – Have students cross obstacles in pairs and individually; demonstrate proper field
     carries and what to do when a hunter falls with a firearm (maintain muzzle control during and after fall); and load and unload while
     being placed into different hunting scenarios (e.g. following each other on a trail during a deer hunt; walking abreast in a field after
     pheasants, etc.); Stress how to lean an ‘unloaded’ (action open) gun properly against a structure such as a fence or in the crook of a
     tree versus improper techniques such as smooth tree or tailgate.

7.   TRIGGER CAUGHT ON OBJECT – Demonstrate the proper techniques for always keeping fingers out of trigger guards until
     absolutely read to fire; constantly monitor techniques during hunter skills trail and/or live firing opportunities. Praise correct
     techniques; firmly fix incorrect techniques using a positive teaching tone/style. Review action types, safety mechanisms and
     hammer actions. Show how to protect a trigger from heavy brush and emphasize muzzle control over trusting a firearm safety
     mechanism. Emphasize action open at all times when not in use or while traveling through difficult brush, crawling, etc.


     GOAL 2. OBEY LAWS - TOP TEN TX LAW VIOLATIONS & Teaching Strategies
                                                      Based on 2014/2015 TX Hunting License Season

1.  NO PROOF OF HUNTER EDUCATION (n=2,902) – Some violators are IN YOUR COURSE for failing to get a hunter
    education certificate prior to legally hunting in Texas!
2. OVER DAILY BAG LIMIT ON DOVE (n=461) – Cover this during your ZONES-OF-FIRE Field Station
3. UNTAGGED WT DEER (n=344) – Cover this upon finding the “dead deer” at the end of your blood trailing exercise
4. NO DEER HUNTING LICENSE OR FAILURE TO SHOW (n=310) – Cover this when you discuss having your license
    prior to going on the HUNTER SKILLS TRAIL and how to properly show the warden your license during one of the stations on
    the trail when a game warden ‘visits’ you (could be a fellow HE instructor acting as the warden if an actual TPWD GAME
    WARDEN is not at your particular course)
5. DOVE HUNTING WITH UNPLUGGED SHOTGUN (n=293) - Cover this during your ZONES-OF-FIRE Field Station
6. FAILURE TO COMPLETE DEER HARVEST LOG (n=286) – Cover this upon finding the “dead deer” at the end of your
    blood trailing exercise
7. DOVE HUNTING OVER BAIT (n=284) Cover this during your ZONES-OF-FIRE Field Station
8. NO DOVE HUNTING LICENSE OR FAILURE TO SHOW (n=279) – Cover this when you discuss having your license
    prior to going on the HUNTER SKILLS TRAIL and how to properly show the warden your license during one of the stations on
    the trail
9. HUNTING OR POSSESSING DEER IN CLOSED SEASON (n=258) – Cover this during the game laws presentation or
    during one of the stations on the trail when a game warden ‘visits’ you
10. TAKING OF AN ILLEGAL BUCK (e.g. <13” Spread) (n=206) – Cover this during the game laws presentation or during a
    station on the trail when a game warden ‘visits’ you.



                                                                       63
GOAL 3. DON’T WOUND - TOP TEN Causes of WOUNDING - Live-fire & Field Exercises
   1. POOR SHOOTING SKILLS – Learn/practice proper shooting skills (“practice makes perfect practice”…) at the range
       (shotgun –sporting clays OR hitting 6 out of 8 crossing shots from 20/30/40 yards, rifle-100 yards, handgun-50-100
       yards, archery-10-50yards) and with a hunter education instructor/shooting coach/parent that employs
       positive/confidence-building/effective shooting techniques.

   2.   SHOOTING BEYOND EFFECTIVE RANGE – Learn/practice good distance estimation skills; use a range finder
        while hunting; learn how to properly “subtend” (moving targets/shotgun) or use a reference points stepped off for actual
        yardages.

   3.   SPORTING ARM NOT PROPERLY SIGHTED IN – Carry sporting arms in sturdy/protective cases while
        traveling; shoot regularly to ensure sights are properly aligned (primarily rifles and archery equipment).

   4.   RUSHING SHOTS – In stationary shooting, ‘flinching’ or rushing the shot increases chances for wounding; use proper
        shooting techniques (e.g. breathing, squeezing the trigger, visualization in rifle/handgun/crossbow shooting; proper
        anchor point/aim/release in archery shooting; and proper lead/timing/trigger pull in shotgun shooting).

   5.   POOR SHOT ANGLES – Take only high percentage, broad-side or quartering-away shots (e.g. big game) and/or
        proper head shots (e.g. birds/small game); avoid ‘risky’ target angles; try to ensure animal is not alerted to your presence.

   6.   POOR SHOT PLACEMENT – Understand animal’s vital zones; focus shot at a quarter-size bullseye in the center of
        the vital zone on stationary shots; learn proper shooting skills (#1).

   7.   FAILURE TO PROPERLY MARK DOWNED ANIMAL AND/OR TO USE A DOG – Strategies for properly
        marking downed game using two reference points for big game (triangulating to visual/audible clues) or using one/two
        reference points for downed birds/small game -- both from the hunter’s position during the shot -- are useful; of course,
        a properly trained pointing/retrieving dog increases harvest rates considerably for birds and scent dogs/hounds for hogs
        and big game (when and where legal).

   8.   TOO MANY SHOOTERS/SHOTS – Empirical data in waterfowl studies show that more than 2 wing shooters
        taking shots at one time and taking more than two shots, individually, while shooting at a flock of birds, increases
        wounding loss; be sure to focus your shot only at ONE bird at the outer/back/upper end of the flock –moving forward
        if shooting at 2nd bird.

   9.   POOR GAME RECOVERY (BLOOD TRAILING) TECHNIQUES - Learn all you can through seeing, hearing
        and even smelling after a shot is taken; Learn how to WAIT enough time to allow most hit animals to expire before
        “pushing” them (There may be some exceptions.); learn how to read signs (e.g. blood, spoor, tracks, broken foliage) of a
        hit animal and stick to the trail, no matter how long it takes to retrieve your animal; use and properly retrieve flagging
        material/toilet paper. (LEGAL REMINDER: Remember proper, legal tagging techniques to claim the animal as your
        own before backtracking to retrieve flagging tape.)

   10. FAILURE TO USE “SWATTER” LOADS OR TAKING FOLLOW-UP SHOTS – Using ‘swatter’ loads such as
       high-pellet count #6 or #7 ½ in waterfowl hunting or being ready to immediately take a follow-up shot on a big game
       animal that went down initially (but got back up) are useful strategies for reducing wounding loss. {SAFETY
       REMINDERS: During the emotions/moments after taking a first shot, always be sure a “second shot” is ALSO safe prior to raising the
       sporting arm, and try to stay as calm and relaxed as possible until finding your quarry dead. (i.e. don’t let your emotions cause an unsafe
       situation!)}




                                                                       64
     GOAL 4. TAKE CARE OF GAME TOP TEN CARE of GAME CONSIDERATIONS
                                                                From Field to Table

 1. BE SURE ANIMAL IS DEAD – Approaching downed game needs to be performed quietly and cautiously. Touch a seemingly-
     dead big game animal with long stick near the eyeball. For turkeys, be careful of legs/kicks (i.e. ‘spurs’). If an upland game bird
     or small game animal (e.g. rabbit, squirrel) is still alive, and you did not have a sporting dog to retrieve the animal, either step on it
     quickly (game bird) or pin it to the ground and dispatch it immediately. Note: Be sure to exhibit good hunting and firearm safety
     skills in the process, especially safe muzzle control. If trapping, learn how to properly dispatch and retrieve game from the
     various traps, acting carefully and cautiously at all times.

 2. PROPERLY DISPATCH GAME – Properly dispatching big game with firearm or knife is a feat which must be accomplished
     from time to time. One quick shot to the head, follow-up shot in the vital organs or knife cut to the jugular in the neck (only if
     properly instructed in such a technique) may be the quickest way to dispatch a large animal. For game birds, compression to the
     chest cavity or ringing/popping of the next vertebrae can be done quickly. For small game, the same separation can be achieved
     with a boot while holding onto of the back legs. Learn quick and effective techniques for dispatching game from an experienced
     hunter/guide.

3.   OBEY TAGGING REQUIREMENTS & EVIDENCE OF SEX – Though tagging requirements are covered in Game Laws
     (Goal #2), it is important to consider proper tagging and evidence of sex requirements when taking care of game in the field,
     especially if evidence of sex has to remain “naturally attached” (e.g. Colorado).

4.   PROPERLY FIELD DRESS/ SKIN GAME – Field dressing and skinning game take practice and the proper techniques.
     Unless you transport the entire big game animal to a game processing facility, skin large game afield or at camp. Always wear
     quality game gloves (e.g. disposable) to protect from blood, cuts and, in some cases, wildlife diseases. Always be careful to avoid
     cutting any part of the organs within the abdomen area of the animal, especially the stomach, intestines and/or bladder. Spoor,
     fluids or contents of such organs will taint the meat and make it “gamy tasting”. Also avoid touching the scent glands with your
     knife edge, as this, too, will taint the meat, especially with rutting big game, collared peccaries (javelina) and furbearers. While
     skinning, avoid cutting through the fur from outside. Instead, cut through the skin from the inside out. Note: As with tagging
     (Goal #2), know the game laws when processing game meat in the field, in preparation for transportation to the final destination.

5.   KNIFE SAFETY – Knife cuts are the most common type of hunting injury, though rarely get recorded as hunting incidents since
     most are handled immediately through direct pressure, Band-Aids and gauze, and are not reported to authorities/hospitals.
     However, some severe cuts have led to hunting fatalities, particularly in the large femoral artery (leg/groin). Great care must be
     taken while field dressing, skinning and processing game meat. Always cut in a direction ‘away’ from yourself and others. Do not
     get in a hurry. Keep knives and other cutting shears sharp and always use quality sharpening equipment to maintain the edge(s) of
     your kni(ves). The same goes for saws and heavier duty equipment.

6.   WASH/WIPE & COOL/ICE GAME MEAT QUICKLY – Especially in warmer/hotter conditions, game should be field
     dressed, skinned and then washed or wiped down and the meat cooled placed in ice as quickly as possible so heat and bacteria do
     not taint or spoil/dry the meat in any way. Game meat also can be hung in cool/cold environments, sheds and garages away from
     predators such as bears and scavengers. Store game in game bags and/or use fly repellant such as pepper to keep pests from laying
     eggs on the meat. The easiest way for most game animals is to skin, quarter and store the meat in a cooler with ice. Be sure to
     prop the quarters atop the ice as much as possible and keep the cooler drained at all times so that meat doesn’t sit in warm/hot
     water if left unchecked or for several days.

7.   PROPER DISPLAY OF GAME – Though considered in responsible and ethical behaviors goal #5, improper display of game
     also may ruin the quality of the meat when transporting in the sun, on a vehicle or when exposed to muddy roads and conditions.
     Be sure to store game in an ice chest or covered/cooled if being transported whole (big game animals). TRAIL and how to
     properly show the warden your license during one of the stations on the trail.

8.   CONSIDER PROPER AGING OF MEAT – Aging meat, especially of larger animals, is a practice that improves quality and
     taste. A general rule of thumb is hanging the larger animals for two weeks (e.g. elk moose), medium big game animals one week
     for (larger deer), 3 days for smaller big game (e.g. deer, antelope) –all at a consistent temperature of 40 degrees Fahrenheit. The
     consistent part can only be achieved in a temperature controlled area, making it fairly tough to age meat without the proper
     facilities. Another option is a larger refrigerator and/or ice chest.

 9. PROCESSING MEAT FOR FREEZER – Much game is wasted each year because it was wrapped or vacuum-sealed
     improperly (causing freezer burn) or left too long (generally over a one-year period) before providing quality table fare. When
     you get a lot of game meat, consider donating part or all such animals to a “Hunters for the Hungry”-style program, or better yet
     to your non-hunting family and friends.
                                                                        65
   10. WILD GAME COOKING – There are lots of wild game cook books and classes out there with excellent game recipes.
       Learn from family and friends how to properly prepare and cook wild game meat for all to enjoy. Go online or to a wild
       game cooking class and experiment with new recipes any time you get the opportunity. Host wild game dinners in your
       neighborhood. Hunting is for MEAT as much as any other benefit – since early times for survival to modern times
       where wild game meat is valued for its organic quality, flavor and taste. Note: Billions of pounds of wild, healthy, organic,
       low-carb/fat/cholesterol meat is harvested and eaten by hunters and their friends each year –meat that lessens the
       pressure of society/grocery stores to provide that much more commercially processed meats, -- a huge ‘win-win’ for
       society and hunters. “Become friends with a Hunter!” if you are a non-hunter and seek organic foods including wild game
       meat.


GOAL 5. BE ETHICAL! TOP TEN ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS “Unwritten laws” & behaviors”
   1.  PHYSICAL FITNESS & PREPARATIONS – Are you in good enough shape to hike in altitude or even a hillside?
       Do you file a hunt plan and leave it with a responsible person? Do you have the proper boots and socks, head gear and
       gloves? Do you have sun screen, bug repellant and other necessary outdoor items? Do you prepare a survival kit
       (signaling, shelter and fire making) that includes a first aid kit for each outing? Is your vehicle properly maintained? Do
       you have enough water? Is your hunting gear and layered clothing ready and in good shape? These are just a few of the
       question you must ask yourself before each hunt.
   2. LEARNING & PRACTICE – Have you learned all you can about the game animal, its behavior and habitat? Have
       you practiced your shooting and other hunting & outdoor skills enough? Have you enough knowledge to know the
       difference between what you plan to hunt and other animals that look like the animal you plan to hunt. Have you secured
       a quality, reputable guide, mentor and/or companion with which to hunt?
   3. INCREASED CHALLENGE & CONSERVATION & EDUCATION - Do you hunt where the animal every
       reasonable chance to escape (i.e. fair chase)? Are you challenging yourself and advancing your outdoor knowledge and
       skills? Do you join hunting and conservation groups that contribute even more to habitat projects, education and
       mentored events? Do you enjoy wildlife/bird watching while hunting and strive to become a naturalist by educating
       others on the outdoors and nature’s way?
   4. PEER PRESSURE - Do you succumb to peer pressure and act illegally, immorally or unethically as a result? Do you
       hang with legal, ethical companions that hold to a high hunting standard?
   5. IMPROVED PUBLIC IMAGE – Do you clean up before heading to town? Do you cover animals when transporting
       meat and game back to home? Do you use vulgar language or otherwise act inappropriately when in the public eye? Do
       you inappropriately brag about game, especially in front of non-hunters? Do you consider non-hunting feelings when
       around a group? Do you dress professionally when representing or presenting on behalf of hunting groups and opinions?
       Do you teach others about the important role hunters play in conservation?
   6. SHOOTING WITHIN EFFECTIVE RANGE - Do you always strive to shoot within your effective range and at
       animals when they present the best chance for a killing shot? Do you limit your waterfowl and dove shots to known
       distances well within your shotgun range? Do you learn how to judge distances and carry a range finder with you while
       hunting? Do you use the correct ammunition for optimal penetration and hits in the vital organs? Do you employ good
       game recovery techniques and stick with it until the animal is found?
   7. EGO & MONEY – Do you dominate every conversation with talk of your hunting expeditions and/or great hunting
       prowess? Do you go on guided, luxury hunts for the sole purpose of showing others your privileged status and trophy
       room? Do you boast about the blood, gore or injury or disrespect the quarry in any way?
   8. CHARACTER, VALUES AND HIGH STANDARDS – Do you set a high standard for yourself and the other
       hunters with which you hunt? Do you exhibit quality character traits while hunting such as sharing in the chores, leaving
       the hunting area better than you found it, picking up litter even if it wasn’t put there by you, helping and considering your
       hunting companions every step of the way? Do you hold values such as honesty, humiliation, hard work and pride in
       knowing you have done the best you can under the outdoor and hunting circumstances?
   9. PHOTOGRAPHY & SOCIAL MEDIA WORLD – Do you take only appropriate photos with respect towards the
       game taken? Do you emphasize the values of being outdoors, with family and friends and the overall experience versus
       ‘killing’ shots, ‘trophies’ and inappropriate photos/videos that shows disrespect for others and the resource/animals? Do
       you overly brag about the size/quantity of game taken, especially on public forums in social media? Do you give hunting
       a good or bad name through your media actions?
   10. THE “GIVE BACK” PHASE - Do you teach hunter education and/or mentor besides your own? Do you advocate for
       the hunting heritage? Do you lead youth hunts or otherwise get involved?




                                                               66
                                                                  Appendix E.
                                         Classroom Exercises (Required Skills)
I.   MUZZLE CONTROL – Point muzzle in a safe direction while inspecting to see if a (dummy) firearm is loaded/unloaded; safely
     passing firearm to another person

II. TREATING ALL FIREARMS AS IF THEY ARE LOADED – Safely inspect various action types of (dummy) firearms and
    demonstrate safe loading and unloading procedures (See #1 SKILL.)

III. ACTIONS OPEN AT ALL TIMES and FINGERS OFF TRIGGER – When not in the act of hunting/shooting,
     demonstrate handling, transporting, casing, crossing obstacles/fences and/or storing firearms in a safe manner at all times (See #1
     and #2 SKILLS.)

IV. SAFE FIELD CARRIES – Safety demonstrate safe field carries including TWO-HAND, shoulder, trail, cradle, elbow and sling
    carries (See #1, #2, and #3 SKILLS.)

V. HUNTER JUDGEMENT – Safely demonstrate swinging a shotgun within a safe zone of fire, inspecting beyond/in front of a
   target and being sure of the target/game being hunted prior to raising the firearms to the target –using binoculars (See #1, #2, #3
   and #4 SKILLS.)

VI. TREE STAND SAFETY – Safely demonstrate or stress the importance of using a safety harness, climbing system and haul line
    while hunting from an elevated position.

                                                                        LESSONS

A. Muzzle Control, Treating Firearms as Loaded, Actions Open and Fingers off Triggers

Objective: Students will safely handle firearms by:
         1. Pointing them in a safe direction (at all times),
         2. Determining if actions are open or closed,
         3. Checking whether firearms are loaded or unloaded, and
         4. Practice opening/closing various action types (Actual inert or dummy firearms)

Materials: “Dummy” firearms with different actions; matching dummy ammunition; several types of gun cases; Saf-T-Plugs for
shotguns/.22 rifles. (Note: You can use “mock” firearms when INERT actual firearms cannot be used or are otherwise unavailable.
(TPWD Hunter Education staff have loaner sets, but please make arrangements early.)

Preparation: At least one firearm is loaded with dummy ammo, safety in the “off’ positions, and put into a case (bolt action should be
preferably in a hard case) and placed on top of table or within a vehicle (pretending to take it from the vehicle in preparation for the hunt itself).

Introduction: Ask class, “What is the first step to handling a firearm safely?” (Answer: Safety Rule #1 – Safe MUZZLE CONTROL!).
“What is the second step?” (Answer: Safety Rule #2 – Treating as if the firearm is LOADED!)

Presentation: Indicate where cased firearms are located then ask class, “So how does that apply to this situation?” What should I do?”
If answers are correct, follow their direction; if not -- interject.

Removing firearm(s) from cases atop table or from vehicle
       1. Choose the case with the loaded dummy firearm. Tell students that first, before opening the case, it should be pointing in
             a safe direction.
       2. Open the case.
       3. Visually inspect the action, “It’s closed and could be loaded.”
       4. Visually inspect the safety, “It’s off, so I’ll put it on.”
       5. Take firearm out of the case. “I’m going to take the firearm out of the case, keeping the muzzle pointed in a safe direction
             and keeping my fingers outside the trigger guard.”
       6. Open the action. (Note: Some firearms must have the safety off to open the action)
       7. Dummy round ejects. “It was loaded!”


                                                                             67
   “Now, I’m going to show you how to safely case and transport a firearm.”

Placing firearm(s) into cases and then into storage (e.g. gun safe) or vehicles
              1. While pointing firearm in a safe direction, open action - “I’m going to visually check the magazine and the
                    chamber to make sure both are clear."
              2. Visually inspect the chamber to make sure it is unloaded.
              3. Open and close action 2-3 times to be sure it is empty or take out the magazine
              4. If demonstrating with a rifle. “Now I’m going to remove the bolt.”
              5. If the magazine is detachable, remove it, too.
              6. Put firearm back in the case with case and muzzle pointed in a safe direction. .
              7. For rifle, place bolt/magazine in the case so that they are separate from the firearm - “Now anyone opening this
                    case can see immediately that this firearm is unloaded.”

Activity: Call upon individuals or pairs of students to come up to remove the next cased firearms. Instructor should make
necessary corrections as students demonstrate the same steps listed above. Have students switch roles for last firearm inspection.
For shotguns, give them a Saf-T-Plug to place in the firearm action before putting it back in its case.

Evaluation: Assess students actions while handling the firearms, i.e. Muzzle pointed in a safe direction and finger outside the
trigger guard. Assess whether students can locate and operate safeties and actions. Check that they inspect chambers and
magazines.

Summary: Ask class, “Why is it wise to treat every firearm as if it is loaded, even one in a case?” Restate ways to safely case firearms
and get them ready for transport. Additional information can be added about what they would do if they encountered a firearm
with which they were unfamiliar? Would it be safe to figure it out without help? If the firearm was unsecure what would they do?
Find and report to responsible adult and/or owner.

B. Safe Firearm Handling

Objective: Students will safely pass a firearm from themselves to another person.

Materials: Dummy firearms and dummy ammunition, unused mousetrap* and rat trap* for icebreaker.

Time: 15 minutes

Preparation: If you are concerned about the mousetrap accidentally ‘firing’ and hurting some you can adjust the trip mechanism or
catch. Bending the catch further over the catch lever will require that more force is needed before the hammer is released.

Introduction: Set the hammer on the mousetrap, tell students that they are going to be passing firearms to each other and they
need to practice being careful by passing the mousetrap, i.e. firearm, around the room. If they don’t want to handle it, it’s okay to
pass. After mousetrap has circulated the class, disarm the hammer. Take out rat trap and tell them you’re going to “Up the ante.”
When setting the catch lever (CAREFULLY) let the hammer slip a couple of times so the rat trap goes “off.” Set the hammer and
then ask “Who wants it?” If somebody wants to accept, on the way over to them drop the trap on the floor. Hopefully it will go
“off.” Now ask the class, “What if that was a loaded gun?” Ask: “Was that safe to pass a loaded ‘firearm’? What could have been
done differently?” If people passed congratulate them on a wise decision. Ask students, “If this is a loaded firearm that you are not
familiar with, is it ok to accept it without knowing if it is loaded? What if the safety is on? Should you accept it then?” No, because
a safety is a mechanical device that can fail.

Presentation: Ask for student to volunteer for a demonstration (different person from earlier exercises), take a dummy firearm and
say to student, “Here, hold this.” If student tries to accept the firearm don’t give it to them and ask, “Was that safe?”
(Variation- have gun loaded with dummy ammo round, keep grasp of gun and don’t let volunteer have it. Take back and eject
round)
Say, “We will demonstrate the best way of passing a firearm from one person to another.”
     1. Place the safety on and open the action of the firearm. Hold the firearms in a two handed carry with action open and one
          hand covering the trigger guard. Always point muzzle in a safe direction.
     2. Ask the student, “What do you want to know about this firearm?” The answer is, “Is it loaded?” Instructor should say,
          “No”. You can also ask your students to say, “Show me”. Show them or demonstrate that the firearm is unloaded.
     3. Have the student accept the firearm with two hands, however do not let go yet, so both you and the student are holding
          onto the firearm. Ask the student, “When someone gives you something what is the polite thing to say?” The answer is
          “thank you”. Or they may say “got it” if you want to be less formal. Say, “Your welcome”, and let go of the firearm. Tell
          the class that when the person says, “Thank you”, that means they have control of the firearm. And when you say,
          “You’re welcome,” you are releasing control of the firearm.

                                                                  68
      4. Throughout entire demonstration the muzzle should be pointed in a safe direction.
      5. Remember to reverse the demonstration when you accept the firearm back from the student, this reinforces the demonstration.
          Additionally, use this method of passing firearms throughout the course.

Activity: Students can pass firearms to each other in small groups. Or students can pass one firearm down a line from student to student.
Make sure each pass is monitored by an instructor that will help prompt the students to communicate and pass the firearm safely.

Evaluation: Assess students as they pass the firearms to each other. Watch for safe muzzle control, communication about status of the
firearm (loaded/unloaded) and that the firearm is safely passed. Continue to assess students passing firearms for the duration of the course,
pay special attention to how they pass firearms on the hunter skills trail if one is used.

Summary: Have the rat trap un-sprung and hammer release. Dangle the rat trap showing the students it is ‘unloaded’. Now hand it off to a
student and say, “Don’t you feel much better (less anxious) about passing this now?” Students should agree that rat trap does not seem
dangerous now. Say to students, “You have seen the best way to pass a firearm!” Take it upon yourself to only accept a firearm if you know
it is unloaded. If you don’t know say, ‘show me’. Once you know a firearm is unloaded then you can safely begin to learn about and/or use
that firearm.”

C. Safe Field Carries

Objective: Students will learn the six ways to safely carry a firearm while in the field and when they are most appropriate.

Time Allotted: 15 minutes

Materials: Dummy firearms (2 or more), one with a sling and one a break over.

Introduction: Have the students estimate the average weight of a firearm. Instruct them that to hold one in one specific carry for long
periods of time would be tiresome. You can pick up the firearm with the sling, and with the muzzle in a safe direction you can hold the
middle of the sling with gun hanging down to your side, like a suitcase. Ask class if this is safe way to carry a firearm? Why not? Instruct the
class that they will learn six different carries and safety considerations of each.

Presentation: Instruct the students that carry selection is determined by safe muzzle direction and the terrain they are moving through. Show
the students each type of carry, via power point and instruct them on which page in their manual they can find the different types.
Demonstrate each carry with a firearm for the students.

Activity: Ask for a volunteer to come up to demonstrate of each carry. As the student demonstrates each carry instruct the class on when it
is best use this carry, safety considerations of the carry and the type of terrain in which it is appropriate.
                1. Two handed carry- The bottom hand holds grip, finger outside the trigger guard, top hand holds forearm of stock.
                     Provides the best muzzle control. It can become tiresome when held for long periods of time. Also called the “ready
                     carry,” why? Easy to shoulder firearm for a shot
                2. Shoulder Carry- The mid-point of firearm rest on shoulder, muzzle points back. Firearm is controlled by hand on butt or
                     on grip, finger is off trigger. Good in waist high cover, don’t use if someone is behind you.
                3. Trail Carry- The firearm is carried in one hand at mid-point, usually just in front of action. It leaves a hand free for
                     balance, but don’t use when debris can get in barrel. And don’t use when someone is in front of you.
                4. Cradle Carry - The firearm is held across belly, mid-point resting across forearm and crook of elbow, muzzle points to
                     side. Comfortable, secure and reduces arm fatigue.
                5. Elbow Carry –The firearm is held to the side of body, under arm, the mid-point rests across the forearm at crook of
                     elbow, muzzle points forward. Comfortable but gives the least amount of muzzle control. With a break action firearm,
                     when the action is open it balances nicely on forearm, muzzle points even farther down. Another plus is that others can
                     see at a glance that action is open and the firearm is safe.
                6. Sling carry- The arm placed through sling, firearm carried on back shoulder blade. The shoulder will bear most of the
                     weight of the firearm where the sling rests. The hand on the carry side reaches up to hold sling for snug fit. An easy carry
                     for long walks through open country, be careful in cover, since muzzle can snag on brush.

         Evaluation: Ask for four new volunteers. Have each student carry a firearm. Arrange the students in a single file line where they
         can point muzzle in at least one safe direction. Have everyone start with a two-handed carry. Then ask each student from front to
         back of the line which carries are safe for them to use. You can call up four more students and have them face the class in a line (as
         if they were quail or pheasant hunting) and ask them which carries were safe for them to use. You could also arrange people in a
         small group to simulate a group of hunters standing around talking and ask them to demonstrate the safe carries. Observe how the
         students obey instruction, mind their muzzles (in relation to each other and class) and keep fingers off trigger. Give praise

                                                                            69
throughout and also at the conclusion to the entire group. (I would combine the activity of Exercise 4 into the evaluation of
exercise 3. I would not make it two separate activities.)

Summary: Because using the two-handed carry can make a hunter tired, it is good to know the different types of carry. A hunter
must also know (for safety reasons which carry is safest for the situation in which they are hunting.

Reinforce to the group that the two handed carry is by far the safest. Muzzle “awareness” is a must, no matter the carry type.

D. Safe Zone of Fire

Objective: Students will learn what a safe zone of fire is, how to find it and how it applies to different hunting situations.

Time Allotted: 15-20 minutes

Materials: 3 firearms or dummy guns, surveyors tape, masking tape, laser pointer or collimator flashlight or strong flashlight with
snoot to narrow and focus beam, 3 chairs, Note: Could use nerf balls, socks tied in a knot or another object instead of laser pointer
or flashlight.

Preparation: Place three chairs in a row with roughly five feet of space between each chair and 6 feet opposite a wall. . Tape strips
of surveyors tape to wall and corners of chair back to create safe shooting zones. Note zones of fire will overlap. Once zones are
set, mark where each chair is to position each shooter in that spot once the chair is removed. Detach surveyor tape from the chairs,
leave the surveyors tape attached to and hanging down from the wall Remove the chairs. When needed the configuration can
quickly be setup. (See diagram below)

Introduction: Ask students to define a safe zone of fire. Lead a discussion to properly define a safe zone of fire as an area in which
a hunter can safely shoot. Generally, it is between 10 and 2 o’clock from an individual hunter’s position. Or the students can
extend their arms to their sides at shoulder height with thumbs up and bring their arms together until they can see both thumbs in
their peripheral vision. . However, a safe zone of fire can change. (If using Power point, go to these slides)

Presentation: Put chairs back in place facing the wall via marks on the floor. Have three students each choose a firearm and
assume a position behind each of the chairs. Have each student shoulder their firearm and declare their safe zone of fire. After
they do, attached surveyors tape from wall to the chairs. This will give the students a constant visualization of the Zones of fire and
serve as points of reference. Remind the students that the two-handed, ready carry is the best when in a zone of fire. .

Activity: Instruct the students in actual hunting situations that require safe zones of firearm, such as, quail, pheasant, dove,
waterfowl, etc. Using one of the species as an example, instruct the students to swing on game but respect their safe zone of fire.
Use the laser pointer/flash light or other object to simulate the flight of a game bird across the wall, left to right, then right to left.
Discuss merits of passing up unsafe shots, i.e. one more bird not worth the risk to companions. Praise proper acts, correct
mistakes.

Switch students to simulate new hunters. Ask each new hunter to show their safe zone of fire. Again use the laser pointer/flash
light or other object to simulate a game bird, but that rises in a different direction and maybe over the heads of the ‘hunters’.
Discuss engaging/disengaging target. Continue switching out students to be hunters and simulating different types of game birds
flying from different directions. Discussing safe zones of fire during each and the merits of passing on unsafe shots that are behind
the group. Discuss the ethics of zones of fire, i.e. when a bird is two people’s zone of fire, “whose shot is it?”

Discuss with students how safe zones of fire apply or change for hunting rabbits or on stands for a deer drive. The light can be run
the light on the floor to simulate game moving on ground.

Evaluation: Assess each student in their role as hunter. Watch for safe muzzle control, two-handed carry, fingers outside the
trigger guard until ready to shoot, staying within their safe zone of fire and passing up questionable shots. Ensure that students
communicate with each other and transfer the firearms safely from one person to the other, as in Lesson B – Safe Firearm
Handling.

Summary: Reiterate that it does not matter kind of terrain you are in when you are hunting and whatever game you may be
hunting, safe zones of fire always apply. . Reinforce the need for good communication. Stress the need to know where all the
hunters are before taking a shot. Hunter orange should be worn when appropriate, especially when quail and pheasant hunting. .
Discuss the number of hunters and how they should move during different hunting situations, ever more than three when walking
abreast, two is best with third acting as group leader. In a duck blind 2 shooters is best, with third acting as duck caller, spotter and
shot caller (“take ‘em).



                                                                    70
                                         Volunteer 1            Chair




                       CLASS
                                                                Chair
                                        Volunteer 2




                                                               Chair
                                        Volunteer 3




                                                       Chair
                                                                                               Volunteer
                                                                                               3
                                                                        Volunteer
E.      Fence Crossing                                                  3                                             Chair

Objective: Students will learn how to safely cross a fence when hunting alone or with other hunters.

Time Allotted: 20 minutes

Materials: Two or more firearms (dummy or operational), matching dummy ammunition, material to simulate wire on a fence (i.e. rope,
string, surveyors tape, duct tape, broom stick), and a hunter orange hat. Optional: A ‘no trespass sign’ to talk about legality of crossing
fence, i.e. need permission to cross onto property.

Preparation: Place 3three chairs in a row, 8 to 10 feet apart. Connect them with rope or tape at the top of the chair backs and again near
the seat, creating the facsimile of a "fence." You can do the preparation of setting up the fence while giving the introduction. (See
attachment)

Introduction: Ask if anyone in the class has ever encountered a fence that they had to cross while hunting. If you get any affirmatives, ask
them what they did, what safety issues are encountered. Praise correct comments. Note they may have omitted a step or two.

Presentation: Select a volunteer, have them choose a firearm and wear the hunter orange hat. Ask them to follow the directions you give on
how to safely cross a fence by yourself.

             1.   Find the place where you are going to cross the fence, then go at least one post down from crossing spot.
             2.   Point muzzle in safe direction.
             3.   Make sure safety is on.
             4.   Unload firearm, put ammo in pocket.
             5.   Take off your hat and place it under the "fence" on other side.
             6.   Keeping the muzzle in a safe direction, place the firearm gun on the other side of the "fence" with the barrel pointing
                  away from crossing spot. Barrel tip rests on hat.



                                                                          71
                 7.  Go back to crossing point and cross fence. Try to cross under fence. If you must climb over try not to damage or
                     alter fence. Climb at a sturdy post and use post to carry most of your weight (gloves are good here). If a tree is
                     growing near the post use it to help distribute weight if safe to do so.
                 8. Pick up firearm gun. Keep muzzle in safe direction, fingers outside of trigger guard.
                 9. Check barrel for obstructions.
                 10. Reload and put Safety on.
                 11. Many people say that they would prop the firearm upright leaning on the fence and then cross. This is dangerous
                     if the firearm is loaded. Also point out that even if it’s not loaded and it falls it may get broken, scratched and the
                     scope sights may be knocked off.

    Activity: Select another volunteer give them a firearm. Now have both volunteers stand on the same side of the fence and have
    them cross the fence as a team. Coach as necessary.

                 1.   Find the place where you are going to cross the fence.
                 2.   Stand back to back and safely unload guns. Point muzzle in safe direction, put ammo in pocket.
                 3.   Determine who will cross first. That hunter hands firearm to the other.
                 4.   Go to crossing point and cross fence.
                 5.   Pass firearms over fence. Muzzles in safe direction.
                 6.   Other hunter crosses fence.
                 7.   Hand back gun.
                 8.   Safely reload and put Safety on.

    Evaluation: Ensure that all participants follow the correct steps, watch for muzzle control, and fingers outside of trigger guards.

    Summary: There are numerous situations in the field where hunters encounter obstacles. Rough terrain and fences are the two
    most common situations. Unloading a firearm before you cross an obstacle is the first step. Don’t ignore or diminish the risk, a
    conscious awareness of safety must be maintained at all times. Ask class what safe carries they would use and how they would
    cross other obstacles such as a steep hill with loss rocks and gravel, a stream or ditch full of water. Discuss the legality of crossing a
    fence, i.e. leases. Discuss the ethics of crossing a fence, i.e. don’t destroy it, and go through a gate when possible, cross at the most
    stable point.

    Attachment: (duct tape can keep simulate barbed wire, i.e. will catch on hunters.)

F. Skills Trail Outline

    Objective: Students will encounter a variety of scenarios that could be experienced when hunting to practice the decision making
    process. They will learn to exercise safe and ethical judgment while hunting by considering three questions, “Is it safe? Is it legal? Is
    it ethical?” before taking any shot. Students will also have the opportunity to practice skills that they learned from previous
    exercises in the classroom.

    Questions about safety and legality should be cut and dry, yes or no. On questions of ethics, student responses will vary. What is
    ethical for some may not be for others. Let the student decide and honor the decision.

    Time Allotted: 30 minutes

    Materials: There can be 2 to 4 hunters depending on your class size, Have the following materials for each hunter: a firearm or
    dummy gun, matching dummy ammo, hunter orange vest, hunter orange hat, and water bottle. The group should have an ammo
    box, and at least one pair of binoculars. Other materials for use on the trail are game decoys or cut-outs- (dove, ducks, turkey, owl,
    deer), antler shed, rubber rattlesnake, rope or surveyors tape, manikin dressed in camo (alternative may be camo shirt hung in tree
    with coat hanger, camo overalls stuffed with newspaper, or even a real person dressed in camo), deer corn, and vehicle .

    Preparation: An ideal site would be outside, have some variety of terrain and cover to make the experience as realistic as possible.
    Being able to hide one scenario from another also helps the class stay focused on one situation before seeing the other. A well-
    defined path to follow is preferable. Each of the 7 scenarios will require their own set up

                 1.   Vehicle: Inside, the firearms should be in their cases, loaded with dummy ammo, 2 hunter orange vests and hats,
                      the ammo box, canteen and binoculars.
                 2.   Dove: Arrange dove in a tree or on the ground. Place a handful of corn on the ground and cover with
                      leaves/grass.

                                                                       72
              3.   Waterfowl: 3-4 duck decoys, 1 owl (or other protected bird). Large dark plastic lawn trash bag, sheeting or mat. Place
                   ducks very close together on the “water” (trash bag). Place owl in a tree to the side (or on the ground).
              4.   Turkey: 2 gobbler decoys, one hen, mannequin dressed in full camo or stuffed camo overalls. In obvious view, set the hen
                   in front of the gobbler. Off to the side, in a clear area, place the other gobbler. Behind it, 15 to 20 yards in the line of fire,
                   place the mannequin in camo to simulate another hunter; preferably it would be sitting with its back against a tree and
                   some cover in front.
              5.   Awareness: shed antler, rubber rattlesnake. Place antler in noticeable spot off trail, place rubber rattlesnake within
                   “striking’ distance without being too obvious. May camouflage with grass.
              6.   Deer: A white-tailed deer decoy, preferably a “grazing” deer with head down. Place the decoy so that the body is
                   recognizable but the head is not so that from the trail the sex cannot be determined. Between the deer and the trail, create
                   a “fence,” using rope or surveyors tape. Ideally the trail would be a loop, beginning and ending at the vehicle. If
                   circumstances don’t allow, a configuration could be set up around a classroom during the break for lunch.

Introduction: Tell the students that they are going to be led through a series of hunting scenarios where they will need to determine whether
or not to take a shot. The instructor will inform the students of the conditions that apply to that scenario. The students should always ask
themselves Three Questions before pointing a firearm at any animal. They are: Is it safe? Is it legal? Is it ethical?

Scenario 1- Leaving the Vehicle

Lead class to the vehicle and ask for two volunteers. Tell them that many hunting accidents occur around vehicles at the beginning or end of
a hunt. Tell the students to open the vehicle and get ready to hunt. While they are doing so ask the class to name 4 Primary Rules of gun
safety:
               1. Always point the muzzle in a safe direction.
               2. Treat every firearm (or bow) with the respect due a loaded.
               3. Be sure of your target, and what is in front of and beyond it.
               4. Keep your finger off the trigger until you are ready to shoot.

See if the volunteers check their firearms to see if they are loaded and generally how they control their muzzles and fingers around the
triggers. If they don’t check their firearms, ask them to do so. Ask them where their ammo should have been (in ammo box). Did they put
on vests and hats? Take binoculars and canteen? Before or after getting firearms guns? They should have put on vest and hats first, then got
binoculars and canteen, then checked firearms. When getting ready to hunt deal with gear first, firearms guns last.

Reverse order when returning after hunt, secure firearms guns first then deal with other gear.

NEVER lean firearms guns against vehicle. Must be vigilant with safety at all times, not just in the field!

Activity: lead group down the trail to next scenarios.
(Switch volunteers after each scenario to maximize participation).

Scenario 2- Dove Hunt

Tell the volunteers they are on a dove hunt. What would be the first thing they would do? (Establish safe zones of fire)

Tell them that not many dove have been flying, they haven’t shot many birds, It is 15 minutes before legal sunset. Point out dove decoys.
Should they take the shot?
Ask the Three Questions: Is it safe? Is it legal? Is it ethical?
(Yes, Yes, Depends)

Next, step forward and reveal the corn. Tell them another hunter poured several bags of corn around where you’re hunting.
Ask the Three Questions: Is it safe? Is it legal? Is it ethical?
(Yes, No, No)

Could go into other considerations (perhaps while walking to next scenario or switching volunteers): must have valid license, migratory bird
stamp, HIP certified, 3 shell max, lead ok, bag limit, possession limit, keep each hunter’s limits separate correct zone/dates, species, leave -
no limit, leave on head and one wing unpicked on for ID, coolers and zip locks for transport, shooting hours, etc.

Switch volunteers, move along to next station.




                                                                             73
Scenario 3 – Duck Hunt

Tell them they are now on a duck hunt, they are each one duck short of their bag limit. Should they take the shot?
Ask them, “What are the Three Questions you should ask before taking a shot?”
They should respond: Is it safe? Is it legal? Is it ethical?

(Yes. Maybe- what if they kill more than 2 ducks? Depends- is it more ethical to flush and shoot in flight?)

Point out owl. Should they take a shot at the owl?
Ask them, “What are the Three Questions you should ask before taking a shot?”
They should respond: Is it safe? Is it legal? Is it ethical? (Yes. No, No)

Could discuss importance of wildlife ID, how hens of different species look similar and implications on bag limit of shooting the
wrong species of hen, what birds are protected/threatened/endangered, 3 shell max, non-toxic shot, stamps needed, different
zones/dates ducks/geese, baiting illegal, etc.

Point out that all laws and regulations regarding waterfowl are not found in the TPW Outdoor Annual. Hunters must find out all
the regulations from the Texas Waterfowl digest. May want to discuss how federal and state laws differ or are alike.

Switch volunteers, move along to next station.

Scenario 4- Turkey Hunt & In the Line of Fire

Tell the volunteers they are now on a spring turkey hunt.
Point out gobbler and hen, should they take the shot?
Ask them, “What are the Three Questions you should ask before taking a shot?”
They should respond: Is it safe? Is it legal? Is it ethical?
(Yes, Maybe- can’t hit the hen, No- wait for clear shot on gobbler.)

Point out solo gobbler, should they take the shot?
Ask them, “What are the Three Questions you should ask before taking a shot?”
They should respond: Is it safe? Is it legal? Is it ethical?
If they don’t see the other “hunter,” tell them to use the binoculars to check.

Instead of the mannequin, if you can get an assistant to serve as the other hunter, this scenario will have a much greater impact on
the class. Do not disclose the other hunter and have them call out at the appropriate moment.

Can discuss importance of not shooting at sound or movement, identifying target, what’s before and behind, wearing hunter
orange to and from hunting location, covering harvested bird with hunter orange for transport out of hunting area. Illegal to shoot
off roost. License, upland bird endorsement, tagging and other rules specific to turkey.
Point out that although you would not be able to walk up on a real turkey wearing hunter orange, people have shot at decoys
before thinking they were real. Also this scenario should remind people how effective camo clothing can be. We see it worn every
day and forget how effective it really is in the woods. You may wish to point out how many eyes were looking at the same
scenario, how close the camo was and how few people actually saw it.

Switch volunteers, move along to next station.

Scenario 5- Awareness

On the way to next station, point out the antler shed by the trail, if they go to pick it up, do they notice the snake?
Can discuss need to be aware of surroundings, importance of Hunting Plan, need to get certified in First Aid CPR.




                                                                  74
Scenario 6- Deer Hunt

Tell them that they are now hunting deer, on a property where the landowner permits only harvesting does. The deer is on the other side of
a fence (rope/tape). Should they take the shot?
Ask the Three Questions: Is it safe? Is it legal? Is it ethical?
(Yes, Maybe- is fence a property boundary? No- don’t know if buck or doe)

Tell the fence is not a boundary. Should they take the shot?
Ask the Three Questions: Is it safe? Is it legal? Is it ethical?

(Yes, Yes, No- don’t know if buck or doe)

Tell them they are hunting in Johnson County, where the Special Antler Restrictions Apply. The deer is an 8 point buck, should they take
the shot?
Ask the Three Questions: Is it safe? Is it legal? Is it ethical?

(Yes, depends on width of rack. Yes)

Go to the deer decoy and have them safely cross the “fence.” Can discuss what to do after the shot, make sure animal is dead as
approaching. Tag immediately, cut out month and day, and complete county and ranch in ink, complete WTD harvest log on back of
license. If deer runs of after shot impact, wait 1 hour before following blood trail. Go to the place where animal was shot and then track,

Scenario 7- Hunt’s Over

Return to vehicle and open truck/car. Tell them the hunt is over and they should pack up to go back home. See if the volunteers FIRST
safely unload the firearms and store the ammo separately. Then remove binoculars, canteen, hats, and vests.

Evaluation: watch to see if they maintain control of their muzzles and if they keep fingers off triggers until ready to shoot. Safeties are on
until aimed. Do they exhibit skills learned from previous exercises? Coach as needed, ask group for input, and praise safe and ethical
behavior and decisions.

Summary: You will need to watch your time and move along to keep on schedule. You may want to have on hand: insect repellant, spray
sun block, extra hats, water. This Skills Trail does not include a blood trail since blood trails can eat up a lot of time. If you have time and
are so inclined, you may want to offer to set up a blood trail after the course is concluded. See the Skills Trail examples in Appendix G of
the book for more extensive trail and ideas.




                                                                            75
                                                       Appendix F.
                           Field Course Exercises (Required Activities)
Field Course must be scheduled at facilities or ranges where SAFE live-fire activities can occur, preferably adjacent to open field
and classroom facilities, too. Field Courses must include the following four (4) components:
     1. Hunter Skills Trail and activities (See Appendix G)
         a. Vehicle
                          i. .22 caliber rifle (min. 10 rounds of ammunition)
                         ii. .177 pellet rifle
         b. Inert “Dummy”: Firearms and Ammunition (ONLY)
                          i. Mossberg ORANGE Rifle & Shotgun Set – All five (5) action types – 3 rifles; 2 shotguns
                         ii. Ammunition for Mossberg – DUMMY .22 cal. rifle, .30-30 cal. rifle, 12 (4) and 20 gauge (2)
                        iii. Simulated firearms and DUMMY AMMO – LaserEd®, Disabled firearms, sticks, etc.
         c. Hunter Orange Vests
         d. 2-D or 3-D Decoys, Frisbees, and other Accessories – Instructors need to acquire Hunter Skill supplies via
             purchase, acquisition using their $10 out-of-pocket per-student fees or by working with their REGIONAL STAFF
             SPECIALISTS or with TPWD HEADQUARTERS staff (by appointments with Hunter Education Coordinator or
             Administrative Assistant) who may have equipment to loan to instructors depending on scheduled dates.

    2.   Live-fire activities (See Appendix H)
         a. Rifle
                         i. .22 caliber rifle (min. 10 rounds of ammunition)
                        ii. .177 pellet rifle
         b. Shotgun
                         i. 20 gauge – youth and women (min. 10 rounds of ammunition)
                        ii. 12 gauge – men (min. 10 rounds of ammunition)
         c. Simulation
                         i. Lasershot®
                        ii. Airsoft
         d. Ear and eye Protection – Instructors need to acquire ear and eye protection (one per student) using their $10 out-of-
             pocket per-student fees or by working with their REGIONAL STAFF SPECIALISTS or with TPWD
             HEADQUARTERS staff (scheduled appointments only with Hunter Education Coordinator or Administrative
             Assistant).
         e. Ammunition – TPWD provides 10 rounds of .22 cal. LR, .177 pellets and shotgun ammunition (20/12 gauge) per
             student – SEE REGIONAL STAFF SPECIALIST or pick up at TPWD HEADQUARTERS (scheduled
             appointments only with Hunter Education Coordinator or Administrative Assistant). AMMUNITION must be
             SECURED in an equipment area with access only to instructors who CONTROL distribution during the actual
             exercises. It is best to have one instructor assigned to the equipment station with access controlled by fence or
             limited access tape.
         f. Targets - Instructors need to acquire .22 targets in their supply orders (one per student) and clay birds/other types of
             rifle/air gun targets using their $10 out-of-pocket per-student fees or as available by working with their REGIONAL
             STAFF SPECIALISTS or with TPWD HEADQUARTERS staff (scheduled appointments only with Hunter
             Education Coordinator or Administrative Assistant).
         g. Trap Machines/Target Boards/Target Spinners – Instructors using shotgun trap machines must be trained in their
             use and now allow anyone, especially students, to operate machines without a safety briefing and training on their
             use. Target backstops must be those approved for safe range use (Follow NRA Range Specifications/Rules).

    3.   Hunter Ethics Activity (See Appendix I)
    4.   Hunter Education FINAL REVIEW & EXAM


                                                                76
                 Appendix G.

   The Hunter Skills Trail
Tamara Trail, Larry Hysmith and Denise Harmel-Garza




                             The
                             Hunter
                             Skills
                             Trail




                        77
Hunter education, especially hunting and firearms safety, is an important process. Hands-on teaching
techniques usually are most effective. The hunter skills trail is hands-on hunter education for both adults
and young people.
This publication describes the hunter skills trail experience and suggests ways to plan, equip, set up and
conduct a hunter skills trail. However, it does not include all possible ideas and variations for developing
such a program. The content and set up of the trail are limited only by the instructor’s imagination.

Objectives
The hunter skills trail may be the first “hunting trip” for beginning hunters. It gives novices a chance to
practice muzzle control, loading and unloading guns, field carries, and other basic skills. The skills trail
allows students of all abilities to experience a variety of hunting situations, not just ones with which they
are familiar. The objective is to motivate students to make safe, legal, ethical decisions in actual hunting
situations. Instructors may evaluate, encourage and correct student behavior instantly through effective
field exercises and tests. These exercises let students practice what they have learned in the classroom.
The hunter skills trail teaches students to think about their own actions and the actions of others.
Methods
The hunter skills trail is a sequence of scenarios set up to simulate a real hunting experience.
Individuals or small groups are directed through the trail and asked to react to these scenarios. The
instructor evaluates students’ reactions to the scenarios, either immediately or at the trail’s end. In a
small group, immediate discussion works best. When individuals are taken down the trail for testing or
competition, discussion of the scenarios works best at the end of the trail.
Participants are often put in “shoot or don’t shoot” situations. They must rely on their knowledge and
skills to answer three questions: 1) Is the situation/shot safe? 2) Is the situation/shot legal? 3) Is the
situation/shot responsible or ethical? Participants must respond to the scenario by “shooting” or
declining to “shoot.”
Other scenarios involve safe or responsible actions while in the field (e.g., tree stand safety, boat safe- ty,
obstacle crossing, littering, etc.). Examples of scenarios begin on page 5.
Materials and Equipment
The items listed below are only suggestions. A successful hunter
skills trail is constructed with creativity and imagination, so the
lack of some items should not mean excluding a scenario. The
materials needed will vary with the specific site, the needs of the
students, and the instructor’s objectives.
Decoys: Decoys can be actual hunting decoys or archery tar-
gets. Although decoys enhance the authenticity of a scenario,
they are large, cumbersome and expensive. Some alternatives are
life size paper targets glued to plywood or card- board, or tacked
to hay bales. An inexpensive set of life size targets can be
ordered from the N. R. A. (see references).
Cardboard targets also are available through retail stores. Soft
decoys work well for turkey and dove scenarios.
Firearms: Operational firearms can be used, but only if no live
ammunition is available. Guns can be simulated with broom
handles, yard sticks, or stakes cut to gun length with muzzle
ends painted orange. Guns also can be cut out of ply- wood or
other materials. Inoperable firearms with the firing

 *Extension Associate-Conservation, Extension Associate-Conservation, and Extension Assistant, Texas A&M
pins removed and holes bored in the sides of the chambers are as effective as operational guns. Local
gun dealers or others may donate old firearms and a gunsmith can remove the firing pins. Actual firearms,
whether operational or dummy, provide a more authentic experience of firearm handling in the field.
Participants should be instructed to assume they have the proper firearm for each scenario (i.e., shotgun,
light rifle, large bore rifle) regardless of what they are carrying.
Deer stand: A stand can be simulated with a stepladder. If a real stand is used it is best not to set it at
full height, but to leave it low for safety and control and to allow everyone to see and hear the discussion.
Existing stands also can be used. Check them first (just as you should before hunting) for damage, weak
points, wasps and other animals.
Camouflage: Camouflage clothing can be put on mannequins or hung on a clothes hanger in a tree.
Camouflage pieces do not have to match. Large pieces of camouflage cloth can be used as demonstration
blinds.
Mannequins: Retail stores often can provide old mannequins, but they may be bulky and heavy.
Lightweight mannequins can be made with chicken wire or camouflage clothing stuffed with newspaper or
hay. Clothes also can be hung in trees and brush. Using live “mannequins” can be very dramatic when
they respond to the student hunters’ actions.
Vehicle: An actual vehicle can be used, or one can be simulated with
chairs.
Fence: Take precautions if an existing fence is used,
especially barbed wire. Using existing fence is discouraged
when there is the possibility of damaging the fence or injuring
a student. Create a fence crossing with two t-posts, stakes,
existing trees, smooth wire, rope, or flagging tape. Even a
broomstick across chairs works well.
Dummy Ammunition: Dummy ammunition looks and
feels like live ammunition, but lacks powder and primer. It
can be obtained from the state hunter education staff and
possibly from hunter education area chiefs.
This adds to the realism of firearm handling because students can choose the proper ammunition for the gun
and practice handling and loading it properly.
Hunter orange vests and caps: These items are used to identify hunters and to
illustrate laws and safety practices related to the use of hunter orange.
“No Trespassing” and/or “No Hunting without Permission” sign/Purple Paint
Wildlife identification materials: Shed antlers, tanned hides, feathers from game birds, tracks and
other materials can be used to teach wildlife identification.
Clay pigeon thrower: Use this to simulate flushing quail or dove.
Binoculars: These are part of a responsible hunter’s equipment. Use them instead of a rifle scope to
identify game.
Asking local landowners and businesses to donate items is a great way to get them involved and keep
them informed of local hunter education events. Do not be afraid to ask for help. Your excitement and
enthusiasm are contagious.

Procedures
Site Selection
Site selection is a very important consideration when setting up a skills trail. Although a large pasture with
plenty of wooded cover more closely resembles an actual hunting experience, a successful hunter skills
trail can be set up in a vacant lot, city park, state park, on school grounds, and even in a parking lot.
Students can be informed that certain man-made features (some buildings, vehicles, etc.) are not to be
considered in the scenarios. Remember that creativity is essential for the success of this activity. Using
natural features of the topography and vegetation enhances the experience. The site should be large
enough so that each scenario is hidden from adjacent scenarios. This prevents confusion, retains the
element of surprise, and maintains student attention on the current situation.
Planning and Set-up
Planning is essential if each scenario on the skills trail is to effectively simulate a hunting situation.
Remember, the student must decide if a scenario is safe, legal and ethical. Scenarios should be planned
so that there are several possible choices related to laws, firearm safety, and ethical decisions. Ideas for
scenarios and the set-up required for each are discussed in the next section. Be sure to allow yourself
plenty of time to set up properly and to rehearse each station. It is a good idea to walk through the site
and identify possible areas for each scenario before setting up. This will ensure that the best use is made
of the landscape (roads and fences, topography, natural draws, vegetation, etc.).

Safety Precautions
Just as in a hunter education classroom, live ammunition is NOT allowed on the skills trail. Dummy
ammunition is available to instructors through the Texas Parks and Wildlife Education Division (see
resource section).
Review firearm safety before beginning the skills trail exercise. This is a perfect time to review the 10
Commandments of Shooting Safety (see resources).
Have a risk management plan. Keep a first aid kit, insect repellent, sun screen, and other helpful items
on hand. Make sure water is available, especially on hot days, as well as restrooms and shaded areas.

Foul Weather Options
If the weather is bad there are several ways to simulate hunting scenarios in the classroom.
“Trigger films” are videos that depict hunting situations and that solicit a “shoot or don’t shoot”
response from the students. With these video simulations, each situation can be “debriefed” or evaluated
just as on the actual skills trail.
Indoor props and obstacles can simulate outdoor experiences. Tie ropes between chairs or a frame
to create a fence crossing. Practice field carries using chairs as obstacles, or tape the floor to indicate
narrow areas on a game trail. Use a stepladder to represent a tree stand, and a harness and haul line to
demonstrate stand safety. Camouflage/hunter orange demonstrations also can be just as effective
indoors.
A discussion of ethical dilemmas is a valuable part of the training.
Wildlife identification and habitats can be taught using animal parts (skulls, hides, molds of tracks,
etc.) and posters or photos for identification. Have the students view photos of different types of habitat
and rank them for various game species (see resource section for 4-H Wildlife Habitat Evaluation).
Playing hunter education trivia is a good way to review what has been taught. Divide the students into
teams and ask them questions about firearm safety, laws and regulations, wildlife conservation, etc.

Evaluation
Students can be evaluated during discussions following each situation, by actually scoring their responses
(see evaluation and scoring form in the resources section), or with a mixture of both. In a typical hunter
education class, discussion is often best. In the hunter education home study testing procedure, the
instructor keeps track of student responses to situations and also leads discussion. In competitions, such
as the Youth Hunter Education Challenge (YHEC), each student is scored individually.

Possible Scenarios
Vehicle
Use a real or simulated vehicle to demonstrate storage of firearms and ammunition while traveling and
safe removal of firearms. Have a variety of gun cases available and discuss their uses. Firearms can be
put in the cab or bed of a truck or in the trunk or back seat of a car. This is a good time to discuss gun
racks and traveling with unloaded rather than loaded guns. Use current hunting incident reports (see
resources) to emphasize the need for vehicle safety. Demonstrate placing firearms in the vehicle both
correctly and haphazardly to encourage discussion of correct procedures.
Landowner Relations/Hunting Regulations
To set the stage, inform students that they have a lease with a landowner. Discuss the fact that the
landowner may have restrictions, such as “does only” and hunting only in designated areas. Tell students
to assume it is the proper season for any legal game animal encountered, such as dove, spring turkey or
deer. This is a good time to discuss a hunter’s responsibility to landowners and the resource, and to
emphasize the importance of following hunting laws and regulations.

                                Obstacles
                                Obstacles are any objects that must be crossed and
                                that can cause an unsafe situation. The general rule is
                                to always unload a firearm before crossing an obstacle.
                                When possible and necessary, unloaded firearms can
                                be handed to hunting partners while one crosses an
                                obstacle. Some examples of obstacles are fences,
                                brush, logs, rocks, gullies and water (creeks, etc.).
                                Obstacles can be created with props as described on
                                pages 4 and 5.
                                Simulate water with a blue tarp secured to the ground
                                with rocks or stakes.


 Deer Stand
 Using any type of stand or blind requires certain safety precautions.
 Entering and exiting stands should be done without the firearm or
 bow in hand. Instead, the firearm or bow should be unloaded or
 un-nocked and tied to a haul line to raise and lower it into or from
 an elevated stand. The stand itself, whether elevated or on the
 ground, should be checked for wear or deterioration and unwanted
 tenants (wasps, birds, raccoons, etc.) before the first hunt. Regular
 checks should be made during the season and repairs made if
 needed. The hunter’s field of view should be unobstructed to
 ensure a good shot. When multiple blinds are set up, various zones
 of fire must be considered. Tower blinds or tree stands should have
 safety harnesses or restraining straps to keep the hunter from
 falling. Always secure the opposite end of the safety harness above
 the head of the hunter. The instructor can use existing stands for
 demonstrations. Portable tree stands work well and can be set up at
 the lowest level to lessen the risk of student injury. Set up a stand
 that has a few problems and ask students if they would use it.
 Discuss each problem and solution.


                                   Zones of Fire
                                   Mark zones of fire with orange flagging tape or orange spray
                                   paint on the ground. A hidden clay target thrower can be used
                                   to test zones of fire, swinging on game, and reaction time.
                                   Setting this up requires special equipment and extra assistance.
                                   Clay targets can be thrown across the path a short distance in
                                   front of the hunters.

                                   This brings up the opportunity to discuss communication
                                   between hunting partners, especially when they are out of each
                                   other’s sight.
Narrow Trail
Use this scenario to force hunters to walk single file rather than side
by side. Entering this area, they must think about muzzle control
and the type of carry necessary to maintain control of the firearm.
Use existing trails or simulate a narrow trail with wooden stakes
and orange flagging or rope. In order to see how the students react,
don’t give prior explanation.

Turkey and Camouflage
                                         Before this scenario, tell the students it is spring turkey hunting
                                         season. They should then know that it is legal to shoot only toms. Set
                                         up turkey decoys in such a way that only one (a male) is a clear shot.
                                         Put another male in a group of hens to create a “don’t shoot”
                                         situation. Behind the lone male that is in the clear, place a
                                         camouflaged “hunter,” preferably b a c k e d to a large tree as a real
                                         turkey hunter would be. The camouflaged hunter could be a
                                         mannequin, a live person, or a set of camouflage clothing hung on
                                         the tree. Using a live person adds to the effectiveness of this scenario.
                                         Discuss wildlife identification, special hunting safety rules (e.g.,
                                         hunting in full camouflage, special turkey hunting safety), what to do
 Road Hunting                            when another hunter approaches, specific hunting tactics and laws.
There are several ways to set up this scenario, but the idea is to place a decoy beside a “public” road
(specified by the instructor) so that the shot is not legal, safe or ethical. You can place the decoy at a
curve in a road and make the students think about people driving around a blind curve. This scenario
also helps students think about what is in front of their target as well as behind their target.

Unidentified Target
A white-tailed deer decoy (a “grazing” deer target works best) with its head in the brush challenges the
student to think about laws and regulations as well as landowner management objectives. The instructor
may inform the students that hunting is allowed for does only or bucks only. The purpose of this station
is to make the students sure of their targets. Most students will recognize that the deer is a white-tailed
deer, but will not know whether it is male or female. Both does and bucks may be legal in the county
where they are hunting; however, if the landowner wants them to hunt only bucks, then the shot is no
longer ethical because it may jeopardize good hunter-landowner relations. This emphasizes that proper
identification of game is essential for making a safe, legal and ethical shot.

Horizons
Place a decoy on a skyline or horizon. This shot is not safe, especially if the
students do not know what is on the other side of the hill. If the light is
fading, identifying the species and sex of the target also can be difficult.

Water Safety
This scenario is for practicing getting into and out of a boat with firearms.
The boat does not necessarily have to be in the water. A boat set on inflated
inner tubes or old tires provides surprising realism. If the boat is in the
water, make sure that it is stabilized a t both ends so that it does not tip or
capsize. A flat bottom or “john” boat in the water can be secured by tying
off each end to give the students the true tipsy feeling of stepping in a boat
while keeping the students and equipment safe. Safety equipment such
as personal floatation devices should be used. Guns should be unloaded
and safe muzzle direction maintained. This is a good station for discussing
drowning, hypothermia, and other safety courses such as boater education.
In the Line of Fire
Place a target between parties of hunters to demonstrate the importance of not shooting at movement and of
identifying what is in front of and behind your target. This situation reinforces the concept of “planning your
hunt, and hunting your plan.” It also shows the importance of wearing hunter orange and keeping in touch
with other hunters on your property or hunting lease.

 “No Trespassing”/“No Hunting” Sign/Purple Paint
 Markings
These signs and/or purple paint markings can be added to any
scenario to challenge students to think about property boundaries
and the responsibilities associated with hunting on private property,
such as lease agreements, establishing contact with neigh- boring
landowners, etc.

                                            Beyond the Target
                                                 This scenario stresses the importance of knowing what is
                                                 beyond your target and the effectiveness of hunter orange
                                                 in a situation where more than one hunter may be in an
                                                 area. Place a large decoy about fifty yards from the point at
                                                 which the hunters will come into view of the animal. Place
                                                 a mannequin dressed in camouflage and hunter orange
                                                 (vest and/or cap) in some brush beyond the target. If a
                                                 mannequin is not available, simply place the clothing in
                                                 the brush. This is also a good time for instructors to
                                                 discuss what should be done if one is on the other side of
                                                 the target as a hunter approaches and the hunter is
                                                 unaware of your presence.


Building/Vehicle beyond Target
The point of this scenario is, again, proper identification of the target
and knowing what is beyond the target. This may also be a good time
to discuss firearm selection (i.e., shotgun vs. rifle), the hunter’s
image in the public eye, and the importance of ethical behavior.

Game Warden/Conservation Officer
Make sure students know what to do if they encounter a game
warden while hunting. Have the local game warden come out and
“check” the hunters on the skills trail. At the first sight of a
warden, a hunter should unload his/her firearm and politely
greet the warden. The hunting license, hunter education card,
photo identification, and applicable permits should be carried
by the hunter at all times. These should be presented to the
game warden in a polite and respectful way.

Litter
Place a soft drink can or paper sack along the trail to teach
students about our responsibility to be good stewards of the
land, and to leave it in better shape than we found it.
Landowners have a better view of hunters who do not
leave trash behind. It is a good idea to pick up and remove
any litter you find, even if it isn’t yours.
Good Shot
Set up a decoy (target) where students can get a good shot that is
safe, legal and ethical. Again, have students correctly identify the
target, judge the distance, and be sure of what is in front of and
beyond the target. Having “good shots” interspersed throughout the
course encourages participation and builds confidence.

Vital Zones and Blood Trailing
After the student has made a good shot, use this scenario to
talk about what happens after the shot. Vital zones can be
discussed, as well as blood trailing and care of big game after
harvest. To simulate blood, mix Karo® syrup and several drops
of red food coloring. Put it in a small bottle with a spout for
laying out the blood trail (a transparent dishwashing detergent
bottle works best). Adding less food coloring and shaking the
mixture until it becomes frothy and pink can simulate lung
blood. Have the students follow the “blood trail” to a “bedded
down deer” under a tree or bush. Discuss tagging, field
dressing and the three things that cause meat to spoil (heat,
moisture and dirt). When following the simulated “blood” trail,
stay off to the side so as not to disturb any of the sign.

Doves in Tree
Dove decoys arranged in a tree can stimulate discussion. Is it legal to shoot them? Is it ethical? Student
responses will vary. There is NO wrong answer. It is legal, and for some, ethical (e.g., a youngster’s first hunt). Let
the student decide, then honor the decision. It might make a difference in his or her future participation in
hunting.

Extensions
Orienteering Course
Basic orienteering activities can be used in conjunction with the hunter skills trail. For example, students
might locate bearings from one blind to another and back to camp; this is a simple triangle course. Keep
these activities short and simple, but encourage practice for proficiency.
Survival and First Aid
Techniques and principles of survival and first aid can be incorporated into the hunter skills trail at
appropriate locations, and definitely should be included as part of planning the hunt. Topics might
include building a shelter and solar still, using pressure points to stop bleeding, identifying poisonous
plants, and dealing with wild animals.

Hunting Regulations
This topic is a must in any hunter education course, and it can easily be covered on the hunter skills trail.
If a game warden is a team member or a resource person for the skills trail, he or she could teach about
regulations. Topics should include seasons, bag limits, proper tagging, hunting hours, legal methods, game
retrieval, trespassing, and hunter orange.

Wildlife Identification
Of course, each target encountered must be
properly identified. However, students can be
given more opportunities to learn wildlife
identification if tracks (either natural or staged),
skulls, skins, feathers, nests, roost trees, rubs,
scrapes, droppings, etc. are used also. This also
helps students learn the habits of animals.

Habitat Management and Conservation
Use the skills trail site to discuss possible habitat
management techniques. In some areas there may
be recent burns or brush clearing, special food
plantings, feeders, and other management
practices in place. Use these to illustrate basic
wildlife management techniques. Habitat
evaluation techniques also could be used to help
students determine whether the site would support
wildlife, and if so, which types. Useful habitat
evaluation techniques can be found in the 4-H
Wildlife Habitat Evaluation Project Manual (see
resources).
                                               Resources
                                                4-H Wildlife Habitat Evaluation Manual
  N.R.A.                                                      To order: Dr. Will Cohen
     Life size game targets -                                 Texas Agricultural Extension Service
     to order: 1-800-336-7402                                 Rt. 2, Box 589
     www.nrahq.org/store                                      Corpus Christi, Texas 78406
     (Training materials)                                     (512) 265-9203
  Texas Parks and
    Wildlife 4200 Smith
    School Road Austin
    Texas, 78744
    1-800-972-1112, option 6, 1
    www.tpwd.texas.gov
    - Dummy ammunition
    - Youth Hunter Education Challenge (YHEC)
       information and contacts
    - videos
    - hunting incident reports
    - other education resources and training
       materials
                                     Hunter Skills Trail
                            Student Evaluation and Scoring Form


 Student name:                                                    Score:
SKILL                                           1 = least competent/5 = most
competent

Muzzle control                                       1     2      3        4   5
Firearm carry positions                              1     2      3        4   5
Shooting positions                                   1     2      3        4   5
Unloaded firearm passing or receiving                1     2      3        4   5
Distance judging                                     1     2      3        4   5
Shoot/don’t shoot decision & reaction time           1     2      3        4   5
Crossing obstacles                                   1     2      3        4   5

KNOWLEDGE
Zone-of-fire                                         1     2      3        4   5
Enter/exit
   vehicle                                           1     2      3        4   5
   stand/blind                                       1     2      3        4   5
   boat                                              1     2      3        4   5
Horizon/beyond target                                1     2      3        4   5
In line-of-fire                                      1     2      3        4   5
Swinging on game                                     1     2      3        4   5
Proper identification of target                      1     2      3        4   5
Regulations                                          1     2      3        4   5

ATTITUDE
Shooter participation/cooperation                    1     2      3        4   5
Conduct as an observer                               1     2      3        4   5
Ethics/conservation                                  1     2      3        4   5
Landowner/game warden relations                      1     2      3        4   5
                                   Funding for this publication was provided by the
                                     Federal Aid in Wildlife Restoration program
                                         through Texas Parks and Wildlife.

                          A special thanks for assistance and cooperation with this publication to
                                     Steve Hall, Terry Erwin, Scotty Oliver, and John Dea.

                                     Produced by Texas A&M AgriLife Communications
                        Extension publications can be found on the Web at AgriLifeBookstore.org Visit
                             the Texas AgriLife Extension Service at AgriLifeExtension.tamu.edu
 Educational programs of the Texas AgriLife Extension Service are open to all people without regard to race, color,
 sex, disability, religion, age, or national origin.

Issued in furtherance of Cooperative Extension Work in Agriculture and Home Economics, Acts of Congress of May 8, 1914, as
amended, and June 30, 1914, in cooperation with the United States Department of Agriculture. Edward G. Smith, Director, Texas
AgriLife Extension Service, Texas A&M.
                                                 Appendix H.
                                         LIVE FIRE EXERCISES
a.   Introduction: The U.S. Army introduced the safety fan at shooting ranges. The safety fan defines the greatest
     distance a specific projectile will travel downrange. The safety fan is a guideline for ranges to address the worst -
     case scenario concerning bullet containment. Functionally, an outdoor rifle or pistol range’s safety fan must be
     defined as projectile containment to the actual property owned or controlled by the range facility. The combined
     effect of range enhancements, management and shooter education can allow safe use of smaller parcels of land.

In designing a range, an engineer or range designer uses risk analysis to analyze the proposed facility. In the discussion
    of risk analysis, certain terms or definitions must be understood:

        Hazard Event: A hazard event results from energy in motion. Any time a firearm is discharged, energy goes
         into motion. When an object goes into motion, there is potential for a consequence such as personal injury
         and/or property damage.

        Zero Consequence: Zero consequence occurs when energy goes into motion without consequence. In order
         to achieve zero consequence, energy in motion needs to be controlled.

        High Risk: High risk is encountered when the energy in motion is not controlled and results in a condition
         other than zero consequence. A high risk period is the time during which a high risk situation exists.

Control of energy in motion can be achieved through education, training, the application of safe gun handling practices,
    and the enforcement of basic gun safety rules.

The primary rules of gun safety are:
     Always keep the gun pointed in a safe direction.
     Always keep your finger off the trigger until ready to shoot.
     Always keep the gun unloaded until ready to use.
     Know your target, what is front and what lies beyond.

Another form of control utilized in risk assessment involves the Four E’s:

        Evaluate exactly what shooting activities, what firearms, what targets, and what distance you engage those
         targets on a particular range.

        Engineer determines whether the range is engineered or designed to safely accommodate the type of shooting
         activities conducted.

        Educate closely examine the education or training of range supervisors and range users. An effective education
         and training program documents and implements what to do and how to do it with emphasis on the key points
         that relate to range safety, range use and range procedures.

        Enforcement of well-developed range rules and regulations. When assessing risk from the enforcement
         standpoint, recognize that a failure to control the angle of the muzzle toward an effective and efficient
         backstop, the premature placing of the finger on the trigger until ready to shoot, loading the gun before it needs
         to be loaded, and not knowing the target or what is beyond are major factors to be considered.

Each of the FOUR E’s has an equal and effective role in controlling energy in motion and in determining the likelihood
    of achieving zero consequences.

b.   Range Enhancements
     Various range enhancements have proven to be significantly effective in limiting bullet containment to the confines
     of a specific property boundary. The following techniques for limiting projectiles to range property will prove
     useful:
         Backstops: height is dependent on use, site and education and training programs put into place by the facility;
          usually between 3 ft. to over 60 ft. high. The majority of outdoor range backstops are made of earth and
          compacted on a 1-1 slope for projectile containment.
         Side berms and Sidewalls: Normally used when separation of ranges is necessary as an additional safety feature
          in containing projectiles, and to accommodate concurrent shooting events on adjacent ranges. An example
          would be a high power rifle range adjacent to a pistol range. The backstops for these ranges may be located at
          different distances from the firing line, and range users may wish to conduct different events at the same time.
          A side berm or sidewall will provide safe access to the target area on one range when the other range is firing.
          Normal height is 8 ft.
         Baffles: Barriers to contain bullets and/or to reduce, redirect or suppress sound waves; placed either overhead,
          alongside or at ground level to restrict or interrupt errant or off-the-target shots.
         Target Placement: One of the easiest ways to control projectiles is to locate the target so projectiles hit the
          target and proceed directly to the backstop. Proper placement of the targets near the backstop is the best way
          to set up a range. Targets should be posted on target backer boards being careful not to place targets on
          wooden structural members designed to hold the target backer board in place. This ensures longer life of the
          supports and cuts down on range maintenance costs. The target backer boards are replaced as needed.
         Mountains or Rolling Hills: In certain areas of the country, ranges can be located in areas where there are high
          mountains or rolling hills that effectively mitigate the need for or height of backstops, side berms and other
          range features.
         Sloping Floor of the Range: When building a new range or enhancing an old one, consider grading the slope of
          the floor of the range from 1 to 3 percent down toward the backstop. This technique helps eliminate drainage
          problems as well as aiding in the containment of errant projectiles.
         Additional Range Enhancements: An additional range enhancement is any kind of barrier, man-made or
          natural, that will stop projectiles from leaving the range. This can be as simple as shooting through an 18”
          diameter concrete tube, 20 feet long, on a 100-yard range. If properly designed and installed, this enhancement
          is not only used for projectile containment, but helps reduce noise problems.

c.   Conclusion
     The applicable principles and design concepts regarding shooting range safety fans for a rifle or pistol range must be
     described, functionally, as the property owned or controlled by the host facility in which bullets must be contained.
     Utilization of risk analysis procedures, enforcement of basic gun safety rules and judicious application of range
     enhancement techniques will collectively ensure the greatest level of safety possible on an outdoor rifle or pistol
     range.

                         CONDUCTING A LIVE FIRING ACTIVITY
a.   Controlled Area: Establish five controlled areas of a shooting range and show how these areas perform specific
     functions to maintain safe and efficient operation.

     1)   Firing Line Area
           A highly controlled area where actual live-firing of firearms is occurring.
           Restricted to the students actually shooting, coaches and range officers.
           No entry or exit without permission of chief range officer.
           Chief range officer must not leave without relief.
           Barricade may be used to help control movement through single entry or exit.
           No eating, drinking or smoking in this area.
           All movements and actions conducted “By Command Only”.
           Inexperienced shooters must be accompanied by an experienced shooter

     2)   Equipment Storage Area
           A controlled and secure area where firearms, ammunition and other “critical”
           Items are stored until ready to be used.
           Must be manned and/or observed at all times.
           Strict and limited access.
           All items contained within this area should be inventoried.
           Check-in/check-out procedure could be utilized as a safety check (tagging procedure).
     3)   Shooters “Ready” Area
           Waiting area for nest group of students to go on the firing line.
           Near firing line area, but no so close to distract activities.
           Staffed to provide supervision and briefing of waiting students.
           Activities in this area include the following:
                                  Safety and procedures briefing
                                  Special training
                                  Demonstrations and familiarization
                                  Records update and maintenance

     4)   Firearms Cleaning Area
           A controlled area where firearms are cleaned
           All firearms safety rules apply
           No live ammunition in this area
           Area must be supervised when students are present
           Secured materials in Equipment Storage Area when not in use
           Use cleaning of firearms as a learning and evaluation tool

     5)   Spectator Area
           A safe and secure area for spectators to view the activities on the range.
           Located to provide good observation, but not distract from the activities.
           This area’s boundaries must be clearly marked.
           Staffed to assist and answer questions.
           Seating may wish to be provided as well as other comforts.
           Absolutely no firearms or ammunition allowed in this area.

b.   Range Policies/Procedures: Identify the recommended policies and procedures that apply to firearms and range
     activities, administration and records, and instructors and staff when conducting live-firing activities.

     1)   Firearms and Range Activities
           Do not allow students to bring their own firearms or ammunition.
           Make sure all staff and students know the general and specific rules that apply to the activities.
           Insure all staff and students know the nomenclature and correct use of available equipment.
           Students receive and load ammunition one round at a time.
           Students shoot for safety, not score.
           One firearm per shooting point.
           All firearms must be pre-checked for safety and accuracy.
           Firearms Safety Check
                    Good overall appearance (cleanliness)
                    No loose or missing parts
                    Mechanical safety operating properly
                    Action smooth – no binding
                    Size and caliber fit shooter
                    Bore clear of obstructions
                    Trigger pull adequate
                    Live-firing test for function
                    Live-firing test for accuracy

     2)   Administration and Records
           Keep a roster of all personnel that were in each particular activity.
           Record of all firearms used.
           Record each described course of fire or student activity (targets, distance, etc.)

     3)   Instructors and Staff
           Use staff that demonstrate patience and understanding and are capable of student performance analysis.
           Review procedures before starting.
            Stand next to shooters, not behind them.
            Watch shooters at all times, paying special attention to safety precautions.
            Have a “dry run” with empty guns if students get confused.
            Talk shooters through procedures and correct any mistakes immediately.

c.   Range Safety Rules: The following list includes some general safety rules for range operations. Go over these
     rules with the students and point out any additional rules your particular range may have.

            Always point the muzzle in a safe direction or down range.
            Keep your finger off the trigger until ready to shoot.
            Always keep actions open and firearms unloaded until told to do otherwise.
            Only proper size ammunition for firearms being used should be available.
            Entry and exit on shooting alley will be only upon command of chief range officer.
            Shooters will only fire at their designated target.
            Shooters must wear ear and eye protection when on the firing line.
            No one should be near or handling firearms when personnel are down range.
            Only firearms and targets authorized by the chief range officer will be used.
            Alcohol and drugs, or persons under their influence, will not be allowed in the firing line area.
            Obey all additional rules as established by particular range or situation.

d.   Range Commands: Identify the basic range commands and explain proper actions shooters should take.

            The shooters must be told four important pieces of information before firing their first round:
              What to do
              How to do it
              When to do it
              If there is a time limit

            Keep commands simple and be sure commands are heard by all shooters.
            All commands are given by the Chief Range Officer or appointed representative, except cease fire.
            Insist on immediate response to range commands.
            The basic range commands are:
              Is the line ready?
              Ready on the left; ready on the right.
              Load and lock (#) rounds.
              Commence firing.
              Cease firing.
              Make sure all bolts are open.
              Retrieve targets.

            Other type of range commands may be utilized in the interest of safety.
            Make sure everyone is familiar with the range commands and their required actions.

e.   Mechanical Problems: Actions to take when mechanical problems arise during firing

        Have the student immediately raise his or her hand while taking care to keep the muzzle pointed down range.
        Emphasize to the student that they are not to move out of position.
        Wait a minimum of 30-60 seconds before opening the action after having a misfire or similar problem.
        If necessary, call a “cease fire” until the situation is corrected.
        Make sure everyone can recognize a “squib load” which is any load, which does not propel the bullet through
         the muzzle.
                                                   Appendix I.
                                            Teaching Hunter Ethics
     Teaching Strategies for Motivating Others to Act Ethically and Responsibly
1.   OPEN, FACILITATED DISCUSSIONS – The art of using “open-ended questions” such as “How do you feel
     about…?” What do you think about…?” “What are ways hunters can act unsafely? -illegally? -unethically?” “What are
     Ethics?” “What are some actions by hunters that demonstrate responsibility towards self? -other Hunters? -non-
     hunters? -landowners? -the resource?” Guiding such discussions towards their obvious conclusion by the group instead
     of the dictate of the instructor, is a powerful way to involve students in critical thinking and their role in becoming a
     responsible hunter and steward of conservation and the outdoors.

2.   BRAINSTORMING, PROCESSING & FEEDBACK - Brainstorming can involve every student and is similar to
     open discussion. A good way to start is to set guidelines, ask a basic question such as “What ways can hunters portray a
     bad image for hunting and conservation? The students brainstorm for 5 minutes, you assign several students catch the
     gist of their ideas and write them down on sticky notes, and have several other students run them up and place them
     randomly on a board/easel. Then you give the students the opportunity to organize their ideas by categories such as
     who each of the actions MOST offends? Landowners? Others? The Resource? Non-hunters? Then you can go into
     feedback/facilitated mode of coming to the conclusion that there are better ways to represent hunting and hunters.

3.   DILEMMA METHOD – Posing “What would you do?” dilemma, “What if?” situations and “Shoot/Don’t Shoot”
     scenarios are effective ways to stimulate discussions of common experiences hunters face on typical hunts. Every
     hunter continually faces, safe, legal and ethical choices within every outdoor experience and it is how he/she responds
     to those situations and makes the right decisions as to how responsible they are and how accountable they are for their
     actions as a hunter. A good dilemma question gives the student a chance to make the most correct choice possible
     among a few choices given them by the instructor. Assumptions are typically made and added circumstances given –but
     an instructor should try to force students to make the best choice, then discuss the scenario even further with the group.
     Discussing ways to be proactive so as not to be put in a dilemma is the ultimate outcome of this method of “teaching
     ethics” (Ethics are caught –not taught!)

4.   “TRIGGER VIDEOS” - Films/videos such as “Shoot/Don’t Shoot” and “The Hunter’s Path” by Madison
     Productions are classic “trigger films” that depict the wrong actions/behaviors followed by a pause for instructor-led
     discussion, followed typically by the right or more appropriate actions that should or could have been taken by the
     hunters. Several states have made their own, and in today’s world of GoPro® and phone video technology, it would not
     take much to make your own trigger video to discuss in hunter education. As with dilemma method, each trigger
     sequence is a ‘typical’ unsafe, illegal or irresponsible action portrayed by a hunter, followed by the correct action that
     should be portrayed.
