   Basic
Fly Fishing
       “Many men go fishing all of
     their lives without knowing that
       it is not fish they are after.”
                      HENRY DAVID THOREAU



Fly fishing, like any other type of fishing, is more than just
catching the fish.

Texas offers an array of fly fishing opportunities for all ages.
Texans can fly fish anywhere: on a pond, river, lake or coastal
bay. One can cast from the shoreline or wading in a river,
from a kayak or boat; for sunfish, trout, bass, redfish
or tarpon.

The TPWD Angler Education Program partners with many
fly fishing clubs, organizations and enthusiasts who offer
fly fishing and fly tying classes and events. Fly fishing clubs
are located throughout the state and welcome beginners.
Find one near you.




Support the sport — buy a fishing license.
Your angler dollars help clean up rivers and streams, restore
fish populations, and create public access to waterways.
Every purchase of fishing tackle carries a tax that goes from
the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to state fish and wildlife
agencies for fisheries research, habitat improvement, aquatic
resource education programs and fishing and boating access.
BASIC FLY FISHING                                                           1



                             Basic Equipment
 Fly rods are very long, flexible rods. When fly fishing, you cast the
 line, not the fly. The reel and line guides are mounted on the bottom.

 Fly rods and fly line come in different sizes known as “weights”
 (wt.). Lighter weight rods and line are used for smaller fish species;
 heavier weights are used for larger fish species such as saltwater
 fish. Fly rods also come in different lengths. The best beginner fly
 rod for freshwater fishing is a 5/6 weight that is 7-1/2 to 9 feet in
 length.

                            Parts of a Fly Rod

                                                            Tip-top Guide




                                     Ferrule – Female



   Butt Section                Snake Guide



                   Stripping Guide


                                                        Tip Section

               Hook
              Keeper

            Grip


 Reel
 Seat
                              Ferrule – Male
 Butt Cap
2                                               BASIC FLY FISHING


                              Basic Equipment
    Fly reels are available in many sizes and various materials. A good
    beginner reel will have a good drag system and the size will match
    the rod size. For saltwater fishing, select a “sealed” reel made of
    anodized aluminum and stainless steel. The reel holds the fly line,
    leader and tippet.

    Backing is an inexpensive cord that connects the fly line to the reel
    and provides extended line for fishing.

    Fly lines come in different colors, are coated, differently tapered
    (double, level or weight forward) and available in floating (F) or
    sinking (S) line. The rod and line weights should match. The best
    fly line for beginners is a “Double Tapered” (DT) floating line. For
    example: DT5F (Double Tapered 5 Weight, Floating line.)

    Leader and tippet line are transparent monofilament line measured
    in diameter using a number followed by an “X” (ex: 4X). A thick
    heavy tippet is an 0X; a fine light tippet is an 8X. Choose the tippet
    size to match the size of the fly and fish you want to target.

    Flies are designed to imitate aquatic insects at different life stages;
    this is known as “match the hatch.”

    • Dry flies imitate adult insects found on the water’s surface.
    • Wet flies imitate nymphs found underwater.
    • Streamers imitate minnows.
    • Poppers imitate large insects or frogs on the water’s surface
      that bass prefer.

                                    Parts of a Fly Line



                                  Backing
                          1
                                            Fly Line               2

          Fly Reel
                          3      Leader                Tippet              Fly
                                                4                 5
BASIC FLY FISHING              CASTING BASICS                        3


                         Casting Basics
        3 Forward Cast



           2 Back Cast

                                         4 Lay
                                           Down

                                 1
                                  Pick
                                  Up




 A standard fly fishing cast is the four-part Overhead Cast.
 Try to blend the individual movements into one smooth casting
 motion. Practice by making one cast at a time, letting the line
 land in front of you each time.

 Casting Sequence
 1. PICK UP
    Rod starts low, pointing down. Gently and slowly lift the rod
    to about 45-degree angle up.
 2. BACK CAST
    a. Swing rod back sharply from the end of the pickup position.
    b. Snap the rod with some force to just past vertical and
       stop quickly.
    c. Turn your head to watch the line straighten out and up.
       The line must straighten before moving to the forward cast.
 3. FORWARD CAST
    a. After line straightens, bring the rod forward smoothly.
    b. Stop rod tip abruptly at about the same 45 degree angle
       where you started the back cast. NOTE: a quick stop is
       very important.
    c. Watch as line straightens out in front of you.
 4. LAY DOWN
    As line straightens out and begins to fall to the water, lower
    the rod tip with the line, at the same time.
4                                         BASIC FLY FISHING


                                  Knots
To connect the leader to the fly line, use a combination of the
Double Surgeon’s and the Loop to Loop knots. First, tie a Double
Surgeon’s knot at the end of each line, the fly line and the leader.
Then, connect the two lines with the Loop to Loop knot.

    Double Surgeon’s Loop
    1. Double about 6 inches of line to
       form a loop.
    2. Tie an overhand knot in the doubled
       line, tucking the loop through, but
       do not tighten yet.
    3. Tuck the loop through one more
       time – a “double over hand” knot.
    4. Wet line, pull tight and trim tag end.

                    Leader   Loop to Loop
Fly Line
                             1. Pass the leader loop over the fly
                                line loop.
                             2. Tuck the leader through the fly
                                line loop.
                             3. Wet line, gently tighten the loops
                                and make sure they form a figure
                                eight shape.

    Surgeon’s Knot
    Use to add tippet to the leader, or
    to “mend” the leader if it breaks.
    1.   Use a length of tippet or
         monofilament and lay it
         along the broken leader end.
    2.   Overlap the two lines by about 6 inches.
    3.   Tie an overhand knot with the doubled lines.
    4.   Tuck the ends through once more —
         for a “double over hand” knot.
    5.   Wet line, pull tight and trim tag ends.
BASIC FLY FISHING                                                    5


         To connect the fly to the tippet, use one of these:
Improved Clinch Knot
An “old standby” known as the fisherman’s knot.
1. Pass the line through         1
   the hook eye and,
   with the tag end,                                5

   make 5 turns around          2
   the standing line.
2. Insert the loose end                             6
   of the line between
   the eye and the first        3
   loop formed.
3. Bring the end through                            7
   the large second loop
                                4
   formed.
4. Wet the line and
   tighten the knot slowly
   while holding the loose end of the line end between thumb
   and index finger so the knot is partly closed before it’s
   secured against the eye. Clip the loose end of the line.

Palomar Knot
The easiest to tie and the strongest knot known to hold
terminal tackle.
1.   Double 4 inches of line to form a loop and pass the loop
     through the eye of the fishing hook. Let the hook hang
     loose.
2.   Tie an overhand knot in the doubled line. Don’t twist or
     tighten line.
3.   Pull the loop far enough to pass it completely over the hook.
4.   Wet the line.
5.   Hold the hook               1                   3
     carefully, and
     pull the loose end
     with the standing           2                   4
     line slowly to tighten
     the loose end.
6                                          BASIC FLY FISHING



                            What Fish Eat



                                                Mayfly Spinners



                                                         Egg-laying Adult




                      Dun




                                                                   Eggs
                   Ascending Nymph

                                             Emerger
    Nymph




            At different stages in their life cycles, many
            aquatic insects are food for fish. A good fly is
            one that tricks the fish into thinking it is food.
            Knowing more about aquatic insects and the
            fish that eat them can increase fishing success.
BASIC FLY FISHING                                                7



 The Mayfly Life Cycle
 The mayfly life cycle is: egg, nymph, dun (subimago) and
 spinner (imago). The nymphs hatch from the eggs and live
 on the bottom, where they become vulnerable to the fish if
 the current knocks them free or if they swim from one place
 to another. During emergence — the mayfly’s most vulnerable
 stage — the nymphs swim to the surface, split their nymphal
 shucks, and emerge as duns. The duns drift on the surface
 for a short while before flying off to the streamside vegeta-
 tion where they molt into spinners. The spinners return to
 the stream to mate above the water, deposit their eggs, and
 fall spent to the stream. Fish also eat the spinners.




          Nymph Natural and Pattern
          Natural mayfly nymphs are not smooth;
          they have gills and legs that move about
          in the water. There are many types of
          fur nymphs that imitate the naturals.
8                                         BASIC FLY FISHING


           Bug Picking — Is Your Creek Polluted?
    Have you ever noticed the many small animals such as insects,
    snails, and worms that live on the rocks and roots at the bot-
    tom of creeks, rivers, ponds, and lakes? Some of these small
    aquatic animals are very sensitive to changes in the water and
    will die if the water becomes polluted. By looking for and rec-
    ognizing the different types of aquatic animals in aquatic envi-
    ronments, you can begin investigating the water quality of
    those environments.
    Equipment: safe footwear for wading, forceps, magnifiers,
    small aquatic nets, pipettes, Bug Picking Data Sheet, pencils
    and shallow pans for holding specimens
    Directions:
    1. Wade into shallow water, turning over rocks, looking for
       aquatic animals (“bugs”). Replace rocks where you found
       them after you inspect them.
    2. Place each “bug” you find in a specimen pan and begin to
       divide them into different types and groups according to
       the Bug Picking Data Sheet. (Water in the pans will keep
       them alive while you take data.)
    3. On the Bug Picking Data Sheet, put a tally mark next to the
       picture that matches each aquatic animal you find. Gently
       return the animals to the water.
    4. Look at the 3 different groups of aquatic animals you found
       in the water. To determine if your water might be polluted,
       answer these questions or circle the correct response.
       • Did you find animals that are pollution sensitive?
         None     1-3 species    More than 3 species
       • Did you find animals that are somewhat sensitive?
       	 None    1-3 species    More than 3 species
       • Did you find animals that are tolerant of pollution? 
         None     1-3 species    More than 3 species 
    This water appears to be (circle one):
    Not Polluted     OK       Polluted
BASIC FLY FISHING                                                                9


What could be happening upstream or on land around the water
to affect the water quality where you are sampling?


I am basing this hypothesis (guess) on:



                         Bug Picking Data Sheet
         Group 1                  Group 2                     Group 3
   Pollution Sensitive        Somewhat Sensitive         Pollution Tolerant




 Number of Species Found     Number of Species Found   Number of Species Found
       3 or More                   3 or More                 3 or More
       1 to 3 Species              1 to 3 Species            1 to 3 Species
       No Species Found            No Species Found          No Species Found
10                                       BASIC FLY FISHING


                Tie a Fly and Catch a Fish

 The Gotcha Beetle
 Terrestrials that fall or are blown
 onto or into the water are beetles,
 ants, grasshoppers, crickets and
 other animals. The Gotcha Beetle
 is tied using foam sheeting for
 the body, adding hackle, rubber
 legs and, if desired, mono eyes
 adds to the attractiveness of the fly. It is simple to tie and a
 real fish getter on our local hill country streams.

 Materials
 Hook: 9480 dry fly or 3906 wet fly size 12-8
 Thread: 6/0 of desired color
 For the body: Strip of foam sheeting of desired color, cut to
 the width of the gap of the hook
 For the ribs: hackle feather of desired color
 For the legs: thin rubber pieces of desired color
 Indicator: yellow yarn, combed out or a thin strip of yellow foam
 Mono eyes: extra small or small eye pieces if desired

                       1   Secure thread on hook shank one quarter
                           the length of the hook shaft behind the
                           eye of the hook. Wrap the thread back to
                           slightly below the bend of the hook. Wrap
                           the thread forward to the tie-in point then
                           back and forward twice more. This creates
                           a thick thread base to cement the foam
                           underbody to the hook. Apply head
                           cement liberally over the thread base.

                       2   Bind a strip of foam starting at the tie-in
                           point back to slightly below the bend of
                           the hook by creating 5 to 6 segments
                           about 1/10 inch apart. Use 2 to 3 snug
                           wraps at each segment to secure the
                           foam to the shaft of the hook.
BASIC FLY FISHING                                            11


              3   Wrap thread one segment forward (at the
                  bend of the hook). Strip the fuzzy fibers
                  from the thick part of the hackle stem.
                  Hold the feather by the tip (using left
                  thumb and fore finger) stroke down the
                  shaft of the feather with the right thumb
                  and forefinger so the hackle fibers spring
                  out at right angles to the stem. Bind the
                  bare stem of the feather to the shaft of
                  the hook with 3 to 4 snug wraps. The tip
                  of the feather should be pointing well
                  behind the bend of the hook and the shiny
                  side of the feather is facing the fly tier.

              4   Wrap the thread forward covering the
                  previous wraps to the mid shank. Cut two
                  pieces of rubber leg material about 2-1/2
                  inches in length. Bind one on each side of
                  the hook shank with 2 loose wraps. Even
                  the legs and position them as desired.
                  Then make a third snug wrap around the
                  hook shank and the legs, securing them in
                  the desired position.

                  Wrap the thread forward to a position in
              5
                  front of the foam body. Grasp the feather
                  by its tip with hackle pliers and palmer the
                  hackle forward to just in front of the foam
                  body. Tie off and clip excess feather. If
                  mono eyes are to be added to the fly, tie
                  them on just behind the eye of the hook.

              6   Pull the foam strip up and forward and
                  bind the strip to the hook shank just in
                  front of the under body. After making sev-
                  eral snug wraps around the hook shank,
                  add a tuft of combed-out yarn or a thin
                  strip of foam and secure it with several
                  more snug wraps. Make a whip finish and
                  apply head cement. Trim the foam sheeting
                  forward of where it is bound to the hook
                  shank and immediately behind the eye.
12                                         BASIC FLY FISHING


                         Safety Equipment
      A checklist of things to take with you on your fishing trip.




       Life Jacket/PFD           Water            Small First Aid Kit




          Sunglasses           Sunscreen                 Hat




         Line Nippers            Pliers                 Forceps



     Note
     Swift water is dangerous, especially if above your knees.
     Fishing with a buddy is an essential safety measure.
     Wading sticks help judge water depth when wade fishing
     and help maintain balance on slippery rocks or muddy
     bottoms.
     A wader belt should be worn if wearing waders, to keep
     water out.
BASIC FLY FISHING                                                     13


                         Fish Handling
Handling fish properly protects both you and the fish. Some
fish have sharp fins or teeth that can cut you if you don’t hold
them correctly. Thus, different fish species need to be handled
in different ways. Learn by watching an experienced angler,
but keep the following rules in mind:
1. Always wet your hands first before handling fish. Wet hands
   are less likely to damage the protective coating of mucous
   on the outside of the fish. This slimy layer helps protect the
   fish’s skin from disease and makes it glide easily in the water.
2. Don’t allow fish to flop around on the bank, the dock, or the
   floor of the boat. If keeping fish, put them on ice or in a
   bucket of cool water.
3. If you are not keeping the fish, take the fish off the hook as
   soon as possible. Gently lower it into the water until it begins
   to swim away. If it isn’t ready to swim, you may need to
   slowly swish it in the water first. Remember, no fish is a
   “junk” or “trash” fish. All fish play important roles in the
   aquatic ecosystem.
4. Use barbless hooks or mash down the barb with pliers. This
   will make it easier to remove the hook from a fish.


                                                Bass
                     Sunfish                    For bass
       Catfish                                  3 pounds
                                                or more,
                                                do not hold
                                                by mouth.
                                                Instead,
                                                support its
                                                body with
                                                both hands.




                                        Trout
14                                     BASIC FLY FISHING


                         Regulations
 A Texas fishing license is required to fish in Texas for
 everyone age 17 and older. Buy a license online
 (www.tpwd.texas.gov/buyalicense) or at a local outdoor
 retailer. When fishing, always have your license (online or
 paper) and State ID with you.

 Learn about regulations for the place and fish species you
 hope to catch. Depending on the fish species, seasonal
 regulations may also apply.

 Everyone must follow the regulations, including youth who
 are not required to purchase a fishing license.

 TPWD updates the regulations each year in the Outdoor
 Annual (OA); it is available online or on the free mobile app.



                        www.outdoorannual.com/fishing



 If keeping your catch, be sure to have a ruler or measuring
 tape to check if the fish meets the length limits. It is also a
 good idea to check for any fish consumption advisories (see
 the OA app).




 Did you know?
 When you buy a fishing license, you are supporting fish
 conservation and habitats.
BASIC FLY FISHING                                                 15


                             Ethics
 Do the Right Thing

 Ethics are the rules or values you use to help you choose
 behavior that is fair to others and to yourself. “Do the right
 thing” even when no one is looking.

 To decide if your behavior is ethical, ask yourself:
    • Is it legal?
    • Would it be good if everybody did it?
    • Would it make you proud?

 Be Considerate of Others

    1. Respect the rights of others fishing, swimming, or
       boating near you and give them plenty of space.

    2. Be quiet so that you do not scare the fish away.

    3. Respect private property and always ask permission
       to fish from the landowner.

 Conserve Fish and Habitats

    1. Be respectful of all wildlife.

    2. If not keeping the fish, gently place them back in the
       water as quickly as possible.

    3. Take a small trash bag to pack out your trash and
       other litter left behind by others. Always leave the
       place cleaner than when yo arrived.



 Did you know?

 A major cause of injury to fish and wildlife in and around
 water is getting tangled in abandoned fishing line.
16                                     BASIC FLY FISHING


                      Invasive Species
Stop the invasion! Harmful aquatic invasive species can attach to
your equipment and gear, hitchhiking to other lakes and streams.
Exotic plants and animals can become invasive when they are
released into ecosystems where they are not native. Invasive
species have many negative impacts. They are costly to control
and can take over waterways to make fishing, boating and
swimming less enjoyable. Some common invasive species are
hydrilla, water hyacinth, asian carp, tilapia, and apple snails.
                But, our biggest problems are
 freshwater zebra mussels, giant salvinia and marine lion fish




How you can help:
• Don’t dump your live bait or aquarium plants and animals into
  a bay, pond, lake or stream. You may think you are freeing
  them, but these plants and animals may harm the habitat if
  they carry diseases or are not native. Instead find someone to
  adopt your aquarium. Share unused bait with other anglers or
  put it in a trashcan.
• Clean, drain and dry your boat and fishing gear every time you
  leave a body of water. This includes boots and buckets too.
• Report problems. New sightings of invasive species can be
  reported to www.texasinvasives.org. If you see a fish or
  wildlife kill or suspect a pollution event, contact the TPWD
  Kills and Spills Team hotline at (512) 389-4848.

                   For more information visit
      www.tpwd.texas.gov/huntwild/wild/species/exotic/
                          4200 Smith School Road, Austin, Texas 78744
                                              www.tpwd.texas.gov




                                   © 2022 TPWD           PWD BK K0700-639B (10/22)
                      In accordance with Texas State Depository Law, this publication is available at
                      the Texas State Publications Clearinghouse and/or Texas Depository Libraries.


TPWD receives funds from the USFWS. TPWD prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin,
disability, age, and gender, pursuant to state and federal law. To request an accommodation or obtain information in an
alternative format, please contact TPWD on a Text Telephone (TTY) at (512) 389-8915 or by Relay Texas at 7-1-1 or (800) 735-
2989 or by email at accessibility@tpwd.texas.gov. If you believe you have been discriminated against by TPWD, please contact
TPWD, 4200 Smith School Road, Austin, TX 78744, or the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Office for Diversity and Workforce
Management, 5275 Leesburg Pike, Falls Church, VA 22041.
