Learn to Fish




  A Basic Guide for
the Beginning Angler
         WELCOME TO FISHING IN TEXAS!

Learning to fish is an inexpensive and wonderful way to spend time
outdoors with family and friends. You may find yourself sitting on
the bank of a river or pond using a cane pole with a bobber and
worm, or using a fully rigged boat with state-of-the-art equipment.
Either way, with some basic knowledge, you can begin a safe, fun
and relaxing hobby, and create a lifetime of memories.

In the next few pages, you’ll find tips to improve your skills to have
an exciting and successful fishing trip. You’ll also learn how you can
help protect our state’s precious aquatic resources.



                    Support the Sport
          Buy a fishing license and fish responsibly.
A Basic Guide for
the Beginning Angler                                             Learn to Fish
 TABLE OF CONTENTS                                                                                                   1


    Basic Fishing Tackle...........................................................................            2
    Fishing Rods. .......................................................................................      3
    Fishing Reels........................................................................................      5
    Casting Tips.........................................................................................      6
    Knot Tying............................................................................................ 12
    Natural and Live Baits. ..................................................................... 14
    Lures...................................................................................................... 17
    What Goes in the Tackle Box. ......................................................... 20
    Freshwater Fish.................................................................................. 22
    Saltwater Fish...................................................................................... 23
    Fish Habitats........................................................................................ 24
    Fishing in Texas Farm Ponds. ......................................................... 24
    Fishing in Hill Country Streams...................................................... 26
    Fishing in East and West Texas Streams..................................... 28
    Fishing in Reservoirs......................................................................... 30
    Fishing in Coastal Bays and Marshes............................................ 32
    Finding Good Fishing Spots............................................................. 34
    How to Handle Fish............................................................................ 36
    How to Clean Fish. ............................................................................. 38
    Fishing Safety...................................................................................... 40
    Fishing Ethics. ..................................................................................... 41
    Fishing Regulations. .......................................................................... 42
    Invasive Species. ................................................................................ 45
    More Information. .............................................................................. 46
    Map of State Parks That Have Fishing......................................... 48
Learn to Fish                                               A Basic Guide for
                                                         the Beginning Angler

2                                           BASIC FISHING TACKLE

    Hooks
    Hooks come in an assortment of sizes and styles. Circle hooks are
    great for beginners and safe for fish. If you plan to release your catch,
    use barbless hooks or bend down the barb to make it easier to remove
    the hook. Choose the size of hook for the species of fish you are trying
    to catch and the type of bait you are using. Ask a seasoned angler or a
    bait and tackle dealer for suggestions.

    Line
    Fishing line comes in pound-test (the line size or strength). The larger
    the line size the stronger it is. Six-pound test line is more flexible but is
    not as strong as 12-pound test line. Match your fishing line to your rod
    and reel capability and the species of fish you want to catch. Using
    heavier line or higher pound test than needed may reduce the number
    of hits or strikes you get because heavier line is more visible to fish.

    Sinkers
    Sinkers are weights used to cast your bait, take bait to the bottom,
    hold bait in place, or keep your bobber upright. Use lead-free sinkers
    when possible. Sinkers are designed in several different shapes and
    sizes for various types of fishing techniques. They range in size from
    small (a fraction of an ounce) BB split shot to large five-pound weights
    used in offshore fishing. For a basic tackle rig, place your sinker
    approximately four inches above the hook to allow live bait to look
    natural to the fish.

    Bobbers
    Bobbers are used for three reasons. They keep your bait where the
    fish are biting, they keep bait off the bottom, and they let you know
    when you’re getting a bite. Bobbers come in various shapes and sizes,
    and some are lighted or make noise. Most bobbers are spring-loaded
    and attach to your fishing line with a clip; some allow the line to slip
    through for slip-cork fishing where the bobber adjusts for water depth.
A Basic Guide for
the Beginning Angler                       Learn to Fish
 FISHING RODS                                                                  3


   Rods come in several varieties, each with its own advantages.
   Choosing a rod is a personal choice. You can fish with a can and
   string or a fancy rod and reel. One of the simplest and easiest
   fishing rods is the cane pole.


   Cane Poles




   Cane poles are simply a pole or straight rod with a fishing line tied
   on to it. Use cane poles mainly for shoreline fishing since you’re
   restricted to depth and distance you can reach. Cane poles can be
   made of bamboo, fiberglass, graphite or even a straight tree branch.
   Cane poles are easy to use and inexpensive.



   Spincasting and Baitcasting Rods




                                FINGER GRIP OR STRAIGHT HANDLE
                                LINE GUIDES ON TOP



   Casting rods have “spincast” or “baitcast” reels and line guides
   mounted on top. Spincast rods are easy to handle and perfect for
   beginners. These rods have straight handles and small line guides.
   Spincast tackle is the most popular. Baitcasting rods have either a
   finger-grip or straight handle. The baitcast rod with its more complex
   reel is more difficult to control and is better suited for an experienced
   angler.
Learn to Fish                                               A Basic Guide for
                                                         the Beginning Angler

4                                                          FISHING RODS

    Spinning Rods




                    STRAIGHT HANDLE, LINE GUIDES ON BOTTOM


    Spinning rods have straight handles with large line guides and reels
    mounted on the bottom. Spinning reels cast quickly and long distances,
    making this rod suitable for all types of freshwater and saltwater fishing.


    Fly Rods




                   LONG FLEXIBLE ROD, LINE GUIDES ON BOTTOM


    Fly rods are very long, flexible rods. In flyfishing, you cast the line, not
    the lure. You’ll see anglers develop almost artistic casting techniques,
    adding to the appeal of the sport. Line guides and reel are mounted on
    the bottom of the rod. Fly rods come in various weight classes and
    lengths, suited for different locations and fish.


                            Saltwater Tackle
                            Going after saltwater fish involves a little
                            change in the strength of the equipment. The
                            rods, reels, hooks, line and lures or baits vary
                            just as in freshwater fishing, but they can be
                            stronger and heavier, built to withstand larger
                            fish and natural or artificial structures.
A Basic Guide for
the Beginning Angler            Learn to Fish
 FISHING REELS                                                     5




                       Spincast
                       This popular reel is ideal for beginners
                       but used by experienced anglers as
                       well. Known as a “closed-faced reel,”
                       it’s the easiest reel to use.



                       Spinning
                       This “open-face reel” mounts under
                       the rod. Fishing line spools off quickly
                       allowing longer casts and is preferred
                       for lighter baits and lures.



                       Baitcast
                       Baitcast tackle is suitable for all types
                       of fish and fishing. The spool turns
                       when you cast, however, and can
                       entangle the line if not properly
                       adjusted. You’ll need to practice with
                       this model.



                       Fly Reel
                       The fly reel is designed to allow fluid
                       movement of the fishing line. This reel
                       is mounted on the bottom of the rod.
                       Reels come in different sizes and
                       should match the rod size.
Learn to Fish                                            A Basic Guide for
                                                      the Beginning Angler

6                                                        CASTING TIPS

    Spincasting

    A spincast reel has a button that you push with your thumb to release
    the line.

       1.   Grasp the rod’s handle with one hand. Push the reel’s thumb
            button down and hold it in.

       2.   Face the target area. Aim the rod tip toward the target, about
            level with your eyes.

       3.   Swiftly and smoothly bend your arm at the elbow, raising your
            hand with the rod until it almost reaches eye level. When the
            rod is almost straight up and down, it will be bent back by the
            weight of the practice plug or weight. As the rod bends, move
            your forearm forward with a slight wrist movement.

       4.   When the rod reaches eye level, release the thumb button.


    If the plug landed close in front of you, you released the thumb button
    too late. If the plug went more or less straight up, you released the
    thumb button too soon.
A Basic Guide for
the Beginning Angler           Learn to Fish
 CASTING TIPS                             7


                       SPINCASTING



           1




                           2




       3




                          4
Learn to Fish                                              A Basic Guide for
                                                        the Beginning Angler

8                                                          CASTING TIPS

    Spinning

    With a spinning reel, you use your finger to release the line.

       1.   Grasp the rod’s handle, placing the reel “stem” that attaches
            the reel to the rod between your middle fingers. Extend your
            forefinger to hold the line against the rod. Open the reel’s bail
            with your other hand.

       2.   Face the target area. Aim the rod tip toward the target at
            about eye level.

       3.   Swiftly and smoothly, using just one motion, bend your casting
            arm at the elbow and raise your forearm so that your hand is
            almost at eye level.

       4.   When the rod is almost straight up and down, it will be bent by
            the weight of the practice plug. As the rod bends, move your
            forearm forward with a slight wrist movement.

       5.   When the rod reaches eye level, straighten your forefinger to
            release the line.

       6.   Many reels will automatically flip the bail as you reel in, use
            your hand to flip the bail back before reeling in.



    If the practice plug landed close in front of you, you straightened
    out your index finger to release the line too late. If the plug went more
    or less straight up or behind you, you straightened your index finger
    too soon.
A Basic Guide for
the Beginning Angler                 Learn to Fish
 CASTING TIPS                                   9

                               SPINNING


              1




                       2




          3




                               4




                           5
Learn to Fish                                               A Basic Guide for
                                                         the Beginning Angler

10                                                         CASTING TIPS

     Baitcasting

     The baitcasting reel has a button either on the top right-hand side of
     the reel or a “thumb” button behind and center of the spool that you
     push with your thumb to release the line.

        1.   Grasp the rod’s finger grip or handle with one hand. Push the
             reel’s thumb button down and move your thumb on the spool.
             Release the line so that the practice plug falls to the ground.
             Adjust the spool tension knob (located on the side of the reel)
             so that the spool stops when the plug hits the ground. It may
             take a couple of times to accomplish this and adjust it correctly.
             This will reduce the reel from backlashing when cast.
             Backlashing occurs when momentum from the cast allows the
             spool to keep rotating causing line to ball up once the plug hits
             the water or ground.

        2.   Aim the rod tip toward the target, about level with your eyes.

        3.   Swiftly and smoothly bend your arm at the elbow, raising your
             hand with the rod until it almost reaches eye level. When the
             rod is almost straight up and down, it will be bent back by the
             weight of the practice plug. As the rod bends, move your
             forearm forward with a slight wrist movement.

        4.   When the rod reaches eye level, release your thumb off the
             spool. The moment the practice plug hits the ground, quickly
             place your thumb back on the spool to stop line from spinning
             in the reel and reduce backlash.



     If the practice plug landed close in front of you, you released your
     thumb too late. If the practice plug went more or less straight up,
     you release your thumb too soon.
A Basic Guide for
the Beginning Angler           Learn to Fish
 CASTING TIPS                             11


                       BAITCASTING




                       1




          2




                           3




                4
Learn to Fish                                          A Basic Guide for
                                                    the Beginning Angler

12                                                      KNOT TYING

     Arbor Knot
     Quick, easy connection for attaching
     line to the reel spool.

     1.   Pass the line around the reel
          arbor (spool).
     2.   Loosely tie an overhand knot
          around the main line.
     3.   Tie a second overhand knot in
          the tag (loose) end, tighten and
          clip off the excess line.
     4.   Wet the line, pull the main line
          to slide the main knot against
          the reel spool.


     Palomar Knot
     The easiest to tie and the strongest
     knot known to hold terminal tackle.

     1.   Double 4 inches of line to form a
          loop and pass the loop through the
          eye of the fishing hook. Let the
          hook hang loose.
     2.   Tie an overhand knot in the dou-
          bled line. Don’t twist or tighten line.
     3.   Pull the loop far enough to pass it
          completely over the hook.
     4.   Wet the line.
     5.   Hold the hook carefully, and pull
          the loose end with the standing line
          slowly to tighten the loose end
          above the hook eye.
A Basic Guide for
the Beginning Angler                         Learn to Fish
 KNOT TYING                                                                   13


   Improved Clinch Knot
   An “old standby” known as the fisherman’s knot.

   1.   Pass the line through the hook eye and, with the tag end, make
        5 turns around the standing line.
   2.   Insert the loose end of the line between the eye and the first loop
        formed.
   3.   Bring the end through the large second loop formed.
   4.   Wet the line and tighten the knot slowly while holding the loose
        end of the line end between thumb and index finger so the knot is
        partly closed before it’s secured against the eye.

   Clip the loose end of the line.

   1



                                         5



   2



                                         6



   3




                                         7



   4
Learn to Fish                                             A Basic Guide for
                                                       the Beginning Angler

14                                   NATURAL AND LIVE BAITS

                    Always check current fishing regulations
                    to make sure your choice of bait is legal.



                     COMMON FRESHWATER BAITS

     Crickets and Grasshoppers

     These are excellent choices for sunfish,
     bass and catfish. Both of these insects can
     be caught by hand or with an insect net.
     Look for them in thick, tall grass or at
     night under lights. Laying a cloth, towel,
     cardboard or newspaper on the grass will
     attract crickets. You want to use small
     hooks for sunfish (#6–#10) and medium-
     sized hooks for bass and catfish (#1 or
     #2). Make sure the point of the hook is
     completely covered to increase bites.




     Worms

     Whether it’s an earthworm, red wiggler or
     nightcrawler, worms are a favored choice
     for the majority of freshwater fish in
     Texas. You can either raise your own in a
     compost pile, dig them from your garden or purchase from bait shops
     and fishing tackle stores. Remember to cover the point of the hook
     when fishing for sunfish to keep them from pulling the worm off the
     hook. Store live, leftover worms in the refrigerator for the next time
     you go fishing.
A Basic Guide for
the Beginning Angler                       Learn to Fish
 NATURAL AND LIVE BAITS                                                      15


   Minnows

   Varieties of minnows and other bait
   fish are used to catch both fresh and
   saltwater fish. Keep minnows in an
   aerated minnow bucket and don’t
   crowd them. Remember to change the water often to keep the
   minnows lively. Hook them through the lips or under the dorsal fin.
   Avoid hooking through the backbone because this will kill the minnow.
   See the Outdoor Annual for bait regulations.

   Crayfish

   Crayfish, known as crawfish, crawdads
   or mudbugs, are used for catching large-
   mouth and smallmouth bass, white bass,
   catfish and freshwater drum. They can
   be caught in small ponds, roadside
   ditches or where depressions hold water
   frequently and usually after a rain. These can be fished either live,
   dead or using just the tail. Hook through the underside of the tail so
   the point protrudes through the top. Catfish and freshwater drum
   don’t mind if it’s alive or dead. Grasp the crayfish, and pull the tail
   away from the head, threading the hook through its tail or both sides
   of body. Freshwater drum prefer crayfish to any other type of live or
   dead bait.

                           PREPARED BAITS

   From homemade recipes to commercially-made baits, these are
   primarily used for catching bottom-feeding fish like catfish and carp.
   Choices include canned corn, stink bait, cottonseed cake, hot dogs,
   dough balls — the list is endless. Fishing with treble hooks works best
   to keep the bait on the hook. Do not use treble hooks for catch and
   release fishing or with young children.
Learn to Fish                                            A Basic Guide for
                                                      the Beginning Angler

16                                    NATURAL AND LIVE BAITS

                      COMMON SALTWATER BAITS

     Shrimp
     Shrimp is a popular choice for fishing in
     fresh and saltwater. ONLY USE SHRIMP
     NATIVE TO THE GULF OF MEXICO (see
     bait regs). Shrimp can be either alive
     or dead. Hook live shrimp under the
     rostrum “horn” on the head. Peel or
     leave the shell on fresh dead shrimp
     for fishing on the bottom.



     Crab
     Different species are used for saltwater
     fishing to catch sheepshead, red drum,
     black drum, cobia and snapper. Sheepshead
     and snapper go after hermit and fiddler
     crabs hooked through the body. Black drum
     and cobia have a liking for blue crabs. Break
     in half or quarters for black drum and hook
     through the body sections. Use small,
     whole, live blue crab for cobia by removing
     the pinchers and hook through the body.



     Squid
     You can purchase dead squid for saltwater bottom-fishing. Fish such
     as gafftopsail catfish, and snapper are good examples. Hook the squid
     two or three times in and out through body to avoid small fish stealing
     the bait.
A Basic Guide for
the Beginning Angler                       Learn to Fish
 LURES                                                                      17


   Both fresh and saltwater anglers use lures to catch a variety of fish.
   There are many types of fishing lures with various patterns, sizes and
   colors. “How to” instructions may be on the package or videos can be
   found online. When selecting a lure, consider where the fish you are
   targeting can be found in the water column.



   Plugs and Crankbaits
   black bass, crappie, striped, white and
   hybrid bass, seatrout, red drum, flounder
   and several offshore species

   Plugs and crankbaits can be made of
   various materials such as plastic, wood
   and sometimes cork. They are classified as
   topwater or diving (shallow, medium and
   deep diving). Most plugs and crankbait
   lures have two treble hooks attached to
   cover the fish’s striking area. Some have
   crankbaits also make noise.



   Spoons
   black bass, striped, white and hybrid bass,
   seatrout, red drum, flounder and several
   offshore species

   Spoons are metal, spoon-shaped lures
   made to resemble a swimming or injured
   baitfish. You can jig them (jiggle them up
   and down), cast and reel them in, or troll
   them behind a boat (let it drag behind the
   moving boat). Many anglers attach a
   swivel to the spoon to prevent it from
   twisting their line during retrieval.
Learn to Fish                                          A Basic Guide for
                                                    the Beginning Angler

18                                                            LURES

     Jigs
     black bass, striped, white and hybrid
     bass, crappie, seatrout, red drum,                        RUBBER
     flounder and several offshore species                     SKIRT


     Jigs have weighted metal or lead heads
     with a body and tail made of rubber
     skirts, feathers, soft plastic or animal
     hair. Numerous sizes, colors and pat-
     terns are used to catch a large majority
     of fresh and saltwater fish. They fish in
     the water column depending on how                       BUG JIG
     long you let them sink and how fast you
     retrieve them.




     Spinnerbaits
     black bass, rainbow trout, crappie on
     small in-line spinners

     Spinnerbaits have one or more blades
     that spin or rotate around a straight wire
     or “safety pin” type shaft. Nearly all
     spinner-baits have tails and bodies made
     of rubber skirts, animal hair, soft plastic,
     feathers, or other materials. They fish in
     the water column depending on how long
     you let them sink and how fast you
     retrieve them.
A Basic Guide for
the Beginning Angler                          Learn to Fish
 LURES                                                           19


   Soft Plastics
   black bass, seatrout, red drum and
   flounder

   Soft plastics are pliable lures made
   into worms, grubs, lizards, crayfish,
   minnows, shrimp, crabs and many
   others, resembling what fish eat.
   Plastics are available in different sizes,
   colors, and some with fish-attracting
   scent. They can be used with or without
   bullet weight sinkers, jig heads or
   spinnerbaits.




   Flies and Poppers
   almost all common sport fish will strike
   a fly or popper of some variety
                                                     POPPERS
   Flies and poppers are small, very light,
   almost weightless lures used primarily
   for flyfishing. A spincast or spinning rod
   and reel outfitted with a “bubble” (clear
                                                     MARCH
   bobber) placed four to five feet above the        BROWN
   lure works well if you don’t have a fly rod.
   These lures are excellent for sunfish and
   bass, but most any fish can be caught on
   these lures.                                      BLUE WING
                                                     OLIVE
Learn to Fish             A Basic Guide for
                       the Beginning Angler

20       WHAT GOES IN THE TACKLE BOX


                      What You’ll
                      Need in Your
                       Tackle Box
A Basic Guide for
the Beginning Angler                         Learn to Fish
 WHAT GOES IN THE TACKLE BOX                                                   21


    Pliers

    Line or nail clippers (to clip line)

    Small first aid kit

    Hooks (various sizes, depending on
    the type of fish you are targeting)

    Bobbers

    Weights (sinkers)

    Snap swivels (optional)

    Artificial lures
    (plugs, spinners, spoons or soft plastics)

    Stringer or ice chest with ice,
    to keep fish from spoiling
    (if you plan to keep and eat the fish)

    Measuring tape

    Outdoor Annual book or app – Rules and regulations

    Fish identification card or booklet

    Small spool of monofilament fishing line


   Selection of artificial lures will depend on what fish you are targeting.
   When selecting artificial lures, it is wise to choose lures that are
   designed to fish at different water levels, such as top water poppers
   and diving plugs.

   Other items to take along with you on your fishing trip:
      •   Cell phone and/or camera
      •   Bug repellent and sunscreen
      •   Fish net (with rubber coating), fish grabber or fish gloves
Learn to Fish                                           A Basic Guide for
                                                     the Beginning Angler

22                                             FRESHWATER FISH




 Channel Catfish
 Ictalurus punctatus                      Bluegill
                                          Lepomis macrochirus
 Fishing Tips: Most active in the
 evening or early night. Easily           Fishing Tips: The simplest of
 attracted and caught during the          tackle is all that is needed to
 day by baiting holes with soured         catch these feisty, hand-sized
 grain, cottonseed cake, hard dog         fish. Preferred baits are worms,
 food or alfalfa cubes. Use               crickets, mealworms, small jigs,
 worms, cutbait, shrimp, liver,           spinners, miniature insect crank-
 blood or stink baits.                    baits or flyfishing tackle (i.e.,
                                          flies, poppers, worm imitations,
                                          etc.).




 Largemouth Bass
 Micropterus salmoides

 Fishing Tips: They will strike           Black Crappie
 artificial baits including crankbaits,   Pomoxis nigromaculatus
 spinner baits, jigs, soft plastics,
 spoons, flies and other various live     Fishing Tips: Black crappie are
 bait look-alikes. Largemouth bass        fond of small minnows, small
 relish live baits such as minnows,       streamer flies, small marabou or
 earthworms, crawfish, leeches,           plastic jigs and worms.
 frogs, lizards, insects and even
 small mice when the opportunity
 offers itself.
A Basic Guide for
the Beginning Angler                    Learn to Fish
 SALTWATER FISH                                                              23




  Southern Flounder                     Red Drum
  Paralichthys lethostigma              Sciaenops ocellatus

  Fishing Tips: Fish with live          Fishing Tips: Use live finger
  finger mullet, mud minnows, live      mullet, cut mullet, live croaker,
  shrimp or artificial lures close to   live or dead shrimp and lures
  the bottom. May also be gigged        fished close to the bottom. Gold
  in shallow water along reefs or       and silver spoons also work well.
  shorelines during low moon            Note: There are stocked red
  phases with a tide movement           drum in a few of our freshwater
  using a lantern or some other         impoundments.
  artificial light.




  Spotted Seatrout                      Atlantic Croaker
  Cynoscion nebulosus                   Micropogon undulatus

  Fishing Tips: Use live shrimp,        Fishing Tips: Offer peeled
  live finger mullet, live croaker or   shrimp fished close to the
  artificial baits (i.e., shrimp/shad   bottom. In fall, catch larger fish
  imitations).                          during migration to the Gulf.
Learn to Fish                                          A Basic Guide for
                                                    the Beginning Angler

24                                                  FISH HABITATS

 Aquatic Food Chain
 Knowing where fish live and what they eat will improve your chance of
 catching a fish.




 Texas Farm Ponds
 Farm ponds are common in Texas. They vary widely in size, water
 quality and the habitats they offer aquatic life. Most are less than an
 acre in size, but even these small ponds can be home to sport fish like
 largemouth bass, sunfish and catfish.
 Good fishing requires good pond management. Careful stocking and
 proper harvest help maintain the balance of predatory fish and their
 prey. Control of aquatic plants keeps a balance between shelter and
 open water.
 Texas Parks and Wildlife Department does not provide stocking or on-site
 consulting services for private lakes and ponds. However, resources are
 available to landowners who want to manage ponds for fishing. You’ll find
 some useful links and tips on where to get more information.
 www.tpwd.texas.gov/landwater/water/habitats/private_water/


            Can you identify the numbered
               fish in the illustration?
                         (Answers are in back)
A Basic Guide for
the Beginning Angler          Learn to Fish
 TEXAS FARM PONDS                        25




                1                    2




                       3

                       POND LIFE
Learn to Fish                                         A Basic Guide for
                                                   the Beginning Angler

26                       TEXAS HILL COUNTRY STREAMS

 Texas Hill Country Streams

 Many of the streams that run swiftly through the rocky, tree-shaded
 hills of Central Texas are fed by springs. These streams are home to
 many species of fish, amphibians, plants and insects, which depend
 on a steady flow of clean water for survival. Some of these species
 (salamanders in particular) are found only in these special spring-
 fed environments. Our state freshwater fish, the Guadalupe bass, is
 found in several streams and rivers of Central Texas.

 Hill Country streams provide good cover for fish with tree roots,
 branches and other vegetation along the edges and uneven, rocky
 bottoms. Insect larvae like to hide under rocks to catch bits of food
 in the current. These larvae, in turn, become food for fish. Many fish
 lay their eggs in the streams’ shallow, gravely riffles. Anglers can
 expect to catch bluegill, bass and catfish in the Hill Country on a
 variety of baits and lures.

 Hill Country streams have always been popular among people who
 love to fish, paddle, swim or watch nature. Many community groups
 have organized to help keep these streams clean, healthy, and
 flowing through wise water use and land use planning.




            Can you identify the numbered
               fish in the illustration?
                         (Answers are in back)
A Basic Guide for
the Beginning Angler               Learn to Fish
 TEXAS HILL COUNTRY STREAMS                            27




                           4




                               5


            A TYPICAL HILL COUNTRY AQUATIC COMMUNITY
Learn to Fish                                         A Basic Guide for
                                                   the Beginning Angler

28                    EAST AND WEST TEXAS STREAMS

 East Texas Streams
 Streams wander between the hills and across the plains of East Texas,
 through banks lined with pines, hardwoods and brush. Leaf litter and
 muddy bottoms cause the water to be cloudy, but they also add vital
 nutrients, providing for a healthy ecosystem.

 East Texas streams include a number of different habitats — riffles,
 runs, open water pools and sloughs, as well as oxbow lakes (remnants
 of streams cut off from the main channel). Seasonal flooding of nearby
 bottomlands provides yet another habitat for the catfish, sunfish, bass
 and other species that thrive there. Catfish are especially adapted to
 this environment and can be caught by fishing near the bottom using
 worms, stink-bait, chicken liver or shrimp native to the Gulf of Mexico.

 West Texas Streams
 West Texas streams are part of a very fragile ecosystem, dependent
 upon a scarce water supply, often fed by springs. As in other parts of
 the state, these streams provide a variety of habitats, from shallow,
 swift-flowing areas to deeper, slow-moving pools supporting a variety
 of fish, reptiles, amphibians, insects and mammals. Because water is
 scarce in West Texas, the riparian areas (banks of a river, stream or
 lake) teem with wildlife.

 Save Water for Wildlife
 You can make a difference by caring for the creeks and rivers that run
 through your neighborhood. Conserve water to preserve aquifers and
 keep springs and streams flowing. Keep litter and pollutants from get-
 ting into to the streams by disposing of litter and pollutants properly.
 Protect vegetation along stream banks and do not disturb streambeds
 to help provide cover and food for fish.


            Can you identify the numbered
               fish in the illustration?
                         (Answers are in back)
A Basic Guide for
the Beginning Angler             Learn to Fish
 EAST AND WEST TEXAS STREAMS                        29




                           6




                       7




             A FRESHWATER RIVER AQUATIC COMMUNITY
Learn to Fish                                         A Basic Guide for
                                                   the Beginning Angler

30                                                      RESERVOIRS

 Reservoirs

 Did you know that Texas has only one natural lake — Caddo Lake?
 All other lakes are “reservoirs,” made when streams or rivers are
 dammed for flood control, public water supply, electric generation,
 irrigation and recreation.

 Texas reservoirs vary in size, shape, depth and clarity across the state.
 In the west, they tend to be broad, flat, shallow and somewhat cloudy
 with sediments, their water level changing with amounts of rainfall.
 Central Texas reservoirs are often steep-sided and deep. These waters
 are relatively clear, depending upon amounts of storm water run-off.
 Water levels can fluctuate dramatically on some lakes during drought
 and flood events. East Texas reservoirs are shallow and relatively clear
 with a more constant water level.

 Each reservoir’s combination of water, aquatic vegetation and
 substrate, or bottom, provides habitat for fish and other aquatic
 organisms. The fish draw anglers who support a statewide, multi-
 billion-dollar sportfishing industry.

 Many reservoirs are stocked with fish such as striped bass, largemouth
 bass, crappie and catfish. Anglers use a wide variety of tackle and
 fishing techniques. Check with local marinas and bait shops for current
 fishing forecasts and tips. You can also check the weekly fishing
 reports on the Texas Parks and Wildlife website:
  www.tpwd.texas.gov/fishreport




            Can you identify the numbered
               fish in the illustration?
                         (Answers are in back)
A Basic Guide for
the Beginning Angler                Learn to Fish
 RESERVOIRS                                       31




                8

                                   9




                    AQUATIC LIFE IN A RESERVOIR
Learn to Fish                                           A Basic Guide for
                                                     the Beginning Angler

32                          COASTAL BAYS AND MARSHES

 Coastal Habitats
 You can fish on the Texas Coast in many places. You can paddle or
 wadefish in the bays, fish from a jetty or pier, surf fish, or go deep sea
 fishing on a charter boat.

 Spotted seatrout, red drum and southern flounder are a few of the
 more popular species to catch. Anglers use croaker, finger mullet,
 shrimp, squid and blue crab for bait along with a variety of lures.

 Bays and Marshes
 Coastal wetland habitats contain the largest diversity of plants and
 animals of any aquatic ecosystem. In the bays, water is salty, but fairly
 shallow, with seagrass beds providing important cover for fish, crabs,
 shrimp and shellfish. Sandbars, spoil islands and shell reefs also
 provide structure. Tidal movements influence the feeding activity
 of all species.

 At the mouths of rivers and streams, the water is less salty with cat-
 tails and salt-tolerant reeds providing cover. The flow of freshwater
 helps maintain a fragile balance of water chemistry that many plants
 and animals have become adapted to and dependent upon. These
 areas are the nurseries for many saltwater fish, crabs, shrimp, and
 shellfish and their importance can’t be overstated. In addition to
 aquatic species, coastal wetlands also support a diversity of bird life.
 Songbirds migrating in the spring often travel great distances across
 the Gulf of Mexico before landing safely on Texas shores. Sadly, coastal
 wetland habitats are being destroyed at an alarming rate as a result of
 development, decreases in water quality and other threats. Communities
 and resource professionals are teaming up to conserve these produc-
 tive habitats.


            Can you identify the numbered
               fish in the illustration?
                          (Answers are in back)
A Basic Guide for
the Beginning Angler              Learn to Fish
 COASTAL BAYS AND MARSHES                        33




           10


                                        11




                                     12


                 COASTAL BAY AND MARSH HABITAT
Learn to Fish                                               A Basic Guide for
                                                         the Beginning Angler

34                             FINDING GOOD FISHING SPOTS

                  Good Habitat Equals Good Fishing
 Food
 Food sources vary for different species of fish. What natural food does the
 fish you are trying to catch like to eat? (See pages 14-19.) Where would you
 find its natural food? Use a natural bait or artificial lure to mimic their prey
 or food preference and cast your line where the prey would be naturally found.

 Oxygen
 Dissolved oxygen is introduced into the water by photosynthesis from plants
 and algae, and as water mixes with the surface air when it tumbles over
 rocks, or wind creates waves. Cold water holds more oxygen than warm
 water. In the summer, when the water is warmer, fish may hang out in
 deeper water where the water is cooler and there is more oxygen.

 Water
 Water quality is important and sometimes difficult to determine by just look-
 ing. “Clear” looking water may have harmful chemicals or lack plankton and
 other nutrients for fish. Some species like catfish have adaptations and can
 thrive in muddy water while others prefer moderately clear waters.
 The physical (temperature) and chemical (pH and salinity) properties of
 water, along with the biodiversity of plant and animal life all play a role in a
 healthy habitat that is ideal for fish. Look for a fishing spot that has good
 biodiversity.

 Shelter
 All fish need “structure” such as rocks, stumps, aquatic plants, and piers to
 provide cover from bright sun, predators and to hide out and wait for prey.
 If the water is flowing, try fishing downstream below one of these structures.
 In saltwater, fish deal with currents and tides. Near the shoreline, find a
 fishing spot down-current from structures such as jetties, piers, and rocks
 where fish are somewhat protected and can catch food floating by. In bays
 and other shallow areas, seagrass beds provide good cover for small fish,
 crabs, and shrimp. These organisms attract larger predatory fish like
 spotted seatrout and red drum.

 Space
 What type of habitat does the fish species prefer? Shallow or deep water?
 Still, slow or fast-moving water? Good fish habitat has enough space to raise
 their young and provide a good arrangement of structure for protection and
 rest, not only for them, but for their prey species as well.
A Basic Guide for
the Beginning Angler                      Learn to Fish
 FINDING GOOD FISHING SPOTS                          35




      IN FRESHWATER




                                   IN SALTWATER


      Try fishing down-current
      from “structures” such
      as rocks, trees and
      stumps, jetties and piers.
Learn to Fish                                           A Basic Guide for
                                                     the Beginning Angler

36                                         HOW TO HANDLE FISH

 Handling fish properly protects both you and the fish. Some fish have
 sharp fins or teeth that can cut you if you don’t hold them correctly.
 Thus, different fish species need to be handled in different ways. Use
 fish gloves, a fish grabber or rubber fish net to safely land your fish.
 Learn by watching an experienced angler, but keep the following rules
 in mind:

 1.   Always wet your hands first before handling fish. Wet hands are
      less likely to damage the protective coating of mucous on the
      outside of the fish. This slimy layer helps protect the fish’s skin
      from disease and makes it glide easily in the water.
 2.   Don’t allow fish to flop around on the bank, the dock, or the floor
      of the boat. If keeping fish, put them on ice or in a bucket of cool
      water.
 3.   If you are not keeping the
      fish, take the fish off the                  CATFISH
      hook as soon as possible.
      Gently lower it into the
      water tail first until it
      begins to swim away. If it
      isn’t ready to swim, you
      may need to slowly swish
      it in the water first.
      Remember, no fish is a
      “junk” or “trash” fish. All
      fish play important roles
      in the aquatic ecosystem.
 4.   If you are not keeping the
      fish, using barbless hooks
      can make it easier to take
      the fish off the hook.
A Basic Guide for
the Beginning Angler                   Learn to Fish
 HOW TO HANDLE FISH                               37


                     BASS
                     For bass three pounds or
                     more, support its body
                     with both hands.




           SUNFISH




                            TROUT
Learn to Fish                                           A Basic Guide for
                                                     the Beginning Angler

38                                           HOW TO CLEAN FISH

 It’s fun to clean and cook your catch. Many fish cleaning how-to videos
 and delicious fish recipes can be found online.

 Keep your catch fresh. Put the fish on ice. If keeping for an extended
 period or overnight, remove the insides and gills to reduce spoilage.
 There are three ways to clean your fish:

      •   Filleting
      •   Skinning
      •   Scaling

                  Always cut away from yourself.

 To fillet a fish:
 Use a cutting board and sharp knife.

 1.   Lay the fish on its side on a flat surface and hold the fish head
      with one hand.
 2.   Place the knife behind the gill cover and cut through the skin and
      flesh down to but not through the backbone, then work the knife
      toward the tail. Keep the blade flat and tight against the bones.
 3.   Place skin side down. Hold the tail with one hand, work the knife
      along the skin. Cut until the fillet is free from the skin.
 4.   Repeat the above steps for the other side of the fish.




 Illustration by Clemente Guzman, TPWD
A Basic Guide for
the Beginning Angler                        Learn to Fish
 HOW TO CLEAN FISH                                                           39



   To skin a catfish:
   Use a cutting board, sharp knife
   and pliers.

   1.   Use the knife to cut around
        the head and down the dor-
        sal to the tail.
   2.   Use the pliers to pull the
        skin back.
   3.   Remove the head and
        insides.




   To scale fish:
   For most fish, you’ll want to remove the scales if the skin is left on.
   Use a knife, fish scaler or large spoon.

   Hold the fish by its tail and scrape from tail to head.




   Catfish and scale illustrations by Linda Pohlod, courtesy of Wisconsin
   Department of Natural Resources
Learn to Fish                                          A Basic Guide for
                                                    the Beginning Angler

40                                                FISHING SAFETY

 1.   Youth should only go fishing under adult supervision.

 2.   Protect yourself from the sun and hooks. Wear a hat, sunglasses,
      sunscreen or sun-protecting clothing.

 3.   Keep at least one rod’s length between you and the next angler;
      look behind you and to the side before casting to avoid hooking
      anyone or anything.

 4.   Consider fishing with barbless hooks or bend the barbs down with
      pliers. It is safer for us and the fish.

 5.   Wear a properly fitting life jacket and fasten it securely.
      Eighty-five percent of drowning victims would be alive today if
      they were wearing a life jacket.

 6.   To rescue a person who falls into the water: REACH the person
      with something they can hang on to; THROW a flotation device to
      them; ROW out to them if you are in a boat; and then GO — for
      help! Don’t jump in and risk drowning yourself.

 7.   Use the “buddy system” when fishing. If something happens to
      you like slipping down a bank, your buddy can help.

 8.   Check the weather forecast before going outside (lightning or
      storms). When fishing in hot or cold weather, protect head, eyes,
      hands, feet, and skin from exposure to wind and sun. In hot
      months, wear light-colored clothing, hat, sunscreen, and take
      plenty of water with you. In cold months, wear layers of clothing,
      gloves, a knit hat and water-proof shoes.

 9.   If your line gets snagged when you have cast it out, gently jiggle
      your line back and forth and from side to side to loosen it. If you
      pull too hard, the hook and line could come loose with such force
      that it could fly back at you and hit you (or someone else).

 10. Check fish consumption advisories (see the Outdoor Annual App).
A Basic Guide for
the Beginning Angler                       Learn to Fish
 FISHING ETHICS                                                                41


   Do the Right Thing
   Ethics are the rules or values you use to help you choose behavior
   that is fair to others and to yourself. “Do the right thing” even when
   no one else is looking.

   To decide if your behaviors are ethical, ask yourself the following
   questions.
        • Is it legal?
        • Would it be good if everybody did it?
        • Would it make you proud?


   Be Considerate of Others
        1. Respect others fishing, swimming, or boating near you.
           Give others plenty of space, avoid loud voices and noises so
           all can enjoy the outdoors.
        2. Respect private property and do not trespass; always know
           where you can fish legally.
        3. Plan ahead and take a trash bag to pack out all litter, even if
           it’s not yours.

   Conserve Fish and Habitats
        1. Play and land fish quickly. If you are not keeping the fish, gen-
           tly place them back in the water as quickly as possible. (See
           Handling Fish on pages 36-37)
        2. Fish can become stressed during extreme weather (heat or
           cold, droughts and floods), wait until conditions improve to
           protect the fish populations.
        3. All native fish (even the ones you may consider nuisance fish)
           play important roles in the habitat.
        4. Recycle fishing line and other items when possible.

        Did you know?
        A major cause of injury for fish and wildlife in and around
        waterways is getting tangled in abandoned fishing line or
        eating plastic waste they mistake for food.
Learn to Fish                                           A Basic Guide for
                                                     the Beginning Angler

42                                       FISHING REGULATIONS

 Fishing regulations are important for several reasons. Many regulations
 help assure that certain types of fish or certain areas will not be over-
 fished. Some regulations protect certain sizes of fish, allowing for
 better fish reproduction. Fishing regulations protect the rights of all
 anglers as well as the rights of landowners. Below are answers to some
 of the most frequently asked questions about fishing regulations.

 1. Where do I find all fish and wildlife regulations for the state of Texas?
     Fishing and wildlife regulations are found in the Texas Parks and
     Wildlife Outdoor Annual. The regulations are also available on the
     free Outdoor Annual App or online at www.tpwd.texas.gov/oa/fishing.
     Limited print copies are sometimes available from TPWD.
     If you have a question or need clarification, contact your local game
     warden or regional Texas Parks and Wildlife law enforcement office.
     You can find those numbers online at www.tpwd.texas.gov/warden.
 2. Is a fishing license required to fish in Texas?
     Yes, a valid fishing license with a freshwater or saltwater endorse-
     ment is required of any person who fishes or takes fish, mussels,
     clams, crayfish, or other aquatic life in the public waters of Texas.
     In addition, recreational anglers must have a Texas fishing license and
     saltwater endorsement to possess in state water any fish taken in fed-
     eral waters or possess fish on a vessel in the tidal waters of Texas.
     Support the Sport ~ Buy a License through the Outdoor Annual App,
     online or at a retailer near you. www.tpwd.texas.gov/license.
     See the Outdoor Annual for more information about licenses, fee
     discounts and exemptions.
 3. Are youth required to buy a license?
     Youth under age 17 are not required to purchase a license. Youth
     ages 17 and up must have a fishing license in order to fish legally in
     public waters.
 4. How often do I need to renew my fishing license?
     Annual fishing licenses are good for one year, with two options avail-
     able. You can purchase a license that is good from Sept. 1 to Aug. 31.
A Basic Guide for
the Beginning Angler                      Learn to Fish
 FISHING REGULATIONS                                                         43


     Or you may purchase a license that is good for one year from the date
     of purchase. One Day All-Water licenses are also available.
   5. Do I need a fishing license to fish from my private property?
     It depends. You DO need a license if you are fishing into public
     waters (such as lakes and rivers) even if you are on private land.
     But you don’t need a license to fish on private property in a private
     pond that is self contained and not a result of damming a public
     stream or subject to over-flow from public water unless the land-
     owner requires it.
   6. What does a “daily bag limit” for fish mean?
     The quantity of a species of a wildlife resource that may be lawfully
     taken in one day.
   7. What does “possession limit” for fish mean?
     The maximum number of fish a person may possess before return-
     ing to their residence. Possession limit is twice the daily bag on
     game and nongame fish, except as provided in the Outdoor Annual,
     and does not apply to fish in the possession of or stored by a person
     at their residence.
   8. What does “slot limit” mean?
     There are two different types of slot limits:
     Freshwater — Slot limits mean you must release any fish between
     the slot limit numbers. For instance, a largemouth bass at a particu-
     lar lake has a 14" – 21" slot limit. That means you must release
     largemouth bass between 14 and 21 inches. Depending on the fish
     species, some lakes, reservoirs, rivers and streams have exceptions
     to statewide freshwater harvest regulations. See the Outdoor
     Annual for those exceptions.
     Saltwater — Slot limit means you may keep any fish between the
     slot limits. For example, a black drum with a 14" – 30" slot limit
     means you may retain any black drum between 14 and 30 inches.
     All others must be released.
     Remember to check your state bag and size limits before going
     fishing.
Learn to Fish                                            A Basic Guide for
                                                      the Beginning Angler

44                                       FISHING REGULATIONS

 9. Can I give another person my fish if I don’t want to bring them
    home?
     Yes, whether they have a fishing license or not. However, you need
     to give them a Wildlife Resource Document (WRD) along with the
     fish you’re giving them. A WRD form can be found in the Outdoor
     Annual or it can be handwritten on a piece of paper. It must have
     the following information:
      • Name, signature, address, phone number, and fishing or hunting
        license number, as required, of the person who caught or killed
        the wildlife resource
      • Receiver’s name and address
      • Description of the fish (number and type of species or parts)
      • Date fish was caught or killed
      • Location where fish was caught or killed (name of county, lake,
        area, bay, stream or ranch)

 10. What if I catch a fish that is under the size limit, but it dies.
     Can I keep it?
     No, if a fish dies while in your possession and it does not meet the
     size or bag limits, the law requires that you must still release it in
     the water where it will become food for other animals.

 11. What should I do with a fish that I catch in a public waterway
     that I don’t want to keep because I consider it an undesirable
     fish?
     You should put it safely back in the water. It is not legal to catch
     and purposefully kill non-game fish or fish that don’t meet the legal
     bag and size requirements.

 12. Are there special regulations for bait?
     Yes, there are several regulations that apply to bait. It is unlawful
     to use game fish (whole or part) as bait. Some counties also have
     specific bait fish regulations, know where you are fishing and the
     local regulations.
     See the online Outdoor Annual or App for ALL bait regulations.
A Basic Guide for
the Beginning Angler                      Learn to Fish
 FISHING REGULATIONS                                                          45

                      I NVA S I VE S PE CI ES
   Harmful aquatic invasive species can attach to your equipment, gear,
   paddlecraft, boats and trailers, hitchhiking to other lakes and streams.

          There are many harmful aquatic plant and animal species.
       See the TPWD website or the Outdoor Annual for a list of species.

                        Our biggest problems are:

       ZEBRA MUSSELS          GIANT SALVINIA         MARINE LIONFISH




   Invasive zebra mussels have infested several Texas lakes. The microscop-
   ic larvae of this species can’t be seen with the naked eye, but they can
   travel from one watershed to another in water in your gear and boats.

   To curb the spread of zebra mussels, boaters and anglers in public
   fresh waters are required to drain all water from boats and onboard
   receptacles before leaving or approaching a water body.

   See the Outdoor Annual or App for laws about live bait, and fish listed
   as harmful or potentially harmful.

   Never dump your live bait or aquarium plants and animals into a bay,
   pond, lake or stream. Instead find someone to adopt your aquarium.
   Share unused bait with other anglers or put it in a trash can.

       For more information on invasive exotic species that threaten
       Texas waters and how you can help prevent their spread, visit
                         www.TexasInvasives.org
Learn to Fish                                          A Basic Guide for
                                                    the Beginning Angler

46                                          MORE INFORMATION

 More Information on Fishing in Texas
 The information below can be found in the free Outdoor Annual App
 or on TPWD’s website, www.tpwd.texas.gov

 Where To Fish
 Explore fishing spots with online maps and lists. Find paddling trails
 and leased river access info too. See page 48 for State Park
 information.

 Fishing Reports
 Discover what’s biting on more than 90 freshwater lakes and
 saltwater bays with these local fishing condition reports which are
 updated each week.

 Stocking Schedule
 Find out where TPWD is stocking freshwater and saltwater fish
 throughout Texas.

 Fishing Events
 Fishing events and classes are held statewide. Find an event on the
 TPWD Calendar.

 Fish Records and Awards
 The program maintains state record lists for public and private waters
 and water body records for all public lakes, rivers, and bays. Anglers
 (under 17 years of age) compete in a separate division.

 ShareLunker Program
 Anglers who reel in any largemouth bass at least 8 pounds or
 24 inches can participate by entering their lunker catch information.
 Go online or use the ShareLunker mobile app during the year-long
 season (January 1 through December 31).
A Basic Guide for
the Beginning Angler                     Learn to Fish
 MORE INFORMATION                                                           47


   Teach Fishing
   Become a TPWD Certified Angler Education Instructor and teach
   fishing to youth and adults in your community. TPWD provides free
   training, materials, and equipment (where available) to certified
   volunteers who want to share their love of fishing. Contact Angler
   Education at (512) 389-8183 or visit us online.

   Aquariums and Fisheries Centers
   Texas Freshwater Fisheries Center — Athens, Texas
   Discover the mysteries of underwater life in this world-class aquarium
   and hatchery. Also explore our wetlands area and catch a fish at our
   well-stocked fishing pond.

   Sea Center Texas — Lake Jackson, Texas
   See the ocean without getting wet! See some of the biggest fish you
   can imagine in our marine aquarium. Our fish hatchery, gift shop and
   education center are also worth the trip.

   Connect with TPWD
   Signup for free E-mail updates
   www.tpwd.texas.gov/#email-updates-sign-up

   Watch the award-winning PBS TV series
   www.tpwd.texas.gov/newsmedia/tv

   Subscribe to Texas Parks & Wildlife magazine
   www.tpwmagazine.com

   Connect to one of the many social media channels
   www.tpwd.texas.gov/socialmedia
Learn to Fish                                          A Basic Guide for
                                                    the Beginning Angler

48                       FISHING IN TPWD STATE PARKS

 No fishing license is needed at TPWD state parks* when you fish from
 the park property. Park entry fees apply. Many state parks may also
 provide free loaner fishing equipment.
 *Fishing licenses are required if fishing from a boat or paddle craft on
 a lake that is not fully enclosed by the park; and at all other public
 waters including city, county and other community parks and lakes.
                ANSWERS FOR FISH IDENTIFICATION

     1.     largemouth bass                                      7. catfish
     2. sunfish                                                  8. crappie
     3. channel catfish                                          9. bass (white or striped)
     4. bass (white or striped)                                  10. spotted seatrout
     5. longnose gar                                             11. redfish
     6. largemouth bass                                          12. flounder




          This publication and the Angler Education Program is funded by
          the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Sport Fish Restoration program.


                                              Did you know?
         Excise taxes on fishing equipment (paid by manufacturers) along
       with motorboat and small engine fuels, import duties and interest are
         collected and appropriated from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
          Sport Fish Restoration and Boating Trust Fund. These funds are
          apportioned to states and U.S. territories based on a formula of
                 land area and the number of paid license holders.


TPWD receives funds from DHS and USFWS. TPWD prohibits discrimination based on race, color, religion,
national origin (including limited English proficiency), disability, age, and gender, pursuant to state and federal
law. If you believe you have been discriminated against by TPWD, visit tpwd.texas.gov/nondiscrimination or call
(512) 389-4800 for information on filing a complaint. To obtain information in an alternative format, contact
TPWD through Relay Texas at 7-1-1 or (800) 735-2989, or by email at accessibility@tpwd.texas.gov. If you speak
a language other than English and need assistance, email lep@tpwd.texas.gov. You can also contact Department
of the Interior Office of Civil Rights, 1849 C Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20240, and/or U.S. Department of
Homeland Security Office for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties (CRCL), Mail Stop #0190 2707, Martin Luther King,
Jr. Ave., S.E. Washington, D.C. 20528.
                  www.tpwd.texas.gov

In accordance with Texas State Depository Law, this publication is available at
the Texas State Publications Clearinghouse and/or Texas Depository Libraries.

               © 2026 TPWD       PWD BK K0700-639D (7/26)
